# Source: brown-2009-structural-realism-human-nature.pdf
# Converted: 2026-03-06 14:39
# Note: Line numbers here differ from PDF page numbers
---

            STRUCTURAL REALISM, CLASSICAL REALISM AND HUMAN NATURE                            257


  Structural Realism, Classical Realism and Human Nature
                                         Chris Brown


   Abstract

   Kenneth Waltz’s Theory of International Politics is a modern classic, and deserves to be read
   the way classic texts ought to be read, i.e. in context and in its own terms. Recovering the
   context in this case is difficult because of the changes in the discourse since 1979, but one
   difference between the contemporary and the current reception of the text does seem clear –
   Waltzian structural realism (or neorealism) is now, but was not then, seen as breaking with
   the traditions of classical realism. How is this discontinuity to be understood? Part of the
   answer lies in the rhetoric employed by participants in this debate, but, more substantively,
   there is a genuine disagreement between neorealism and classical realism over the role
   played by human nature in international relations. Waltzian neorealism appears, contrary to
   the tradition, to reject any major role for human nature, describing theories that emphasise
   this notion as ‘reductionist’; however, on closer examination, the picture is less clear-cut.
   Waltz’s account of human nature can be related quite closely to the major strands in the
   realist genealogy, but at a tangent to them. Interestingly, and perhaps unexpectedly, it is also
   compatible with at least some of the findings of contemporary evolutionary psychology.

   Keywords: classical realism, evolutionary psychology, human nature, rational choice,
   structural realism, systems, Kenneth Waltz



Reading Waltz in context

There is, I think, a general willingness to admit that Waltz’s major books are ‘modern
classics’ – there are those who claim to see no merit in Theory of International Pol-
itics and to regard its success and influence as incomprehensible, but, I suspect, in
most cases this is simply a way of expressing dislike of the ideas it contains rather
than a genuine judgement on its standing in the field.1 On the other hand, there
are a great many writers who argue with greater sincerity that, while classic in its
own terms, Waltzian realism has parted company with classical realism; indeed the
name ‘neorealism’ implies discontinuity, and was coined (by Richard Ashley in
‘The Poverty of Neorealism’) precisely to make exactly this point – although Waltz
himself prefers the term ‘structural realism’.2 What I wish to argue in this article is
that this judgement, though made in good faith, is misconceived, and that Waltz’s
theory has clear roots in the pasts of realism. In order to make this argument, I will
first backtrack somewhat; if, as I suggest is the case, nearly everyone agrees that Man,
the State, and War3 and Theory of International Politics are classic texts in so far as
they demand that anyone involved in the field must engage with them – and most,
including me, also in so far as they set a standard of excellence in the field – then it


© The Author(s), 2009. Reprints and permissions:
http://www.sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav Vol 23(2): 257–270
[DOI: 10.1177/0047117809104638]
258                          INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 23(2)

is not unreasonable to treat them in the way that we might treat works of ‘classical’
political theory, and to pose the question ‘How are classic texts to be read?’
    Some post-structuralists/deconstructionists answer this question by offering what
is sometimes called a ‘symptomatic reading’ – the locution is that of Louis Althusser,
though the postmodern critic Frederic Jameson is a more accessible source. In The
Political Unconscious Jameson argues that interpretation

      always presupposes, if not a conception of the unconscious itself, then at least some
      mechanism of mystification or repression in terms of which it would make sense
      to seek a latent meaning behind a manifest one, or to rewrite the surface categories
      of a text in the stronger language of a more fundamental interpretive code.4

A symptomatic reading, in other words, pays attention to exclusions as opposed to
surface content, and invites us to reconstruct the text to fill the gaps and silences that
have been identified – an example is Ashley’s ‘Living on Borderlines: Man, Post-
structuralism and War’ which offers a symptomatic reading of Man, the State, and
War, bringing out the ways in which the text escapes the control of the author, at
some points privileging ‘man’, at others ‘the state’.5 There is something to be said
for this approach; exclusions and omissions clearly are important and the author
cannot be allowed to exercise authority over the interpretation of a text – but still
such a reading is always open to the charge that one can make of any text whatever
one wishes to. Rather than a symptomatic reading, but not wholly divorced from the
idea, I would prefer to approach texts along contextualist lines – that is, we must
read texts in contexts. More specifically, we must treat texts as speech-acts, and ask
not just what the author is saying, but also what the author is doing.6 Symptoms are
important here, but what this centrally involves is an attempt to recreate as far as
possible the context within which the author wrote; most of all, we must not assume
that an author is addressing a timeless set of problems, much less a set of prob-
lems that we happen to be concerned with. This is a very difficult task, for two reasons.
To illustrate the first, consider Quentin Skinner’s work on Hobbes. A prodigious
scholar with a command of the relevant classical and early modern languages which
has rarely been equalled, Skinner is probably familiar with everything that might have
influenced Hobbes’s work. Skinner’s scholarship explicitly reflects this reading and
so can claim to place Hobbes in his contemporary context – by following Skinner
we can, in principle, see what worried Hobbes and what he wanted to do with his
texts. It is impossible to imaging this kind of depth of context being available to even
the most learned and industrious commentators on modern writers – we can do our
best, but our best is bound to fall short of the ideal.
    But there is a second, more intractable problem, which (for me at least) is best
illustrated by a musical analogy (as are most things). Consider the post-1945 move-
ment towards ‘authenticity’ in classical music: the attempt to recreate the conditions
under which works by Bach and Beethoven, for example, were first performed – the
use of original or replica instruments, time signatures and notation of the period,
smaller orchestras and choirs, different layouts, and, in general, original performance
           STRUCTURAL REALISM, CLASSICAL REALISM AND HUMAN NATURE                    259

practice based on contemporary accounts.7 The result of this movement has been to
change quite radically what we understand by the performance of, say, a Beethoven
symphony or concerto – there is a great deal more lightness and speed than in the
rather ponderous versions that used to be common, period pianofortes create a much
crisper sound-world, and so on; even modern symphony orchestras usually pick up
some of these changes. But what cannot be said is that we are hearing Beethoven’s
symphonies the way Beethoven’s audiences would have heard them. The reason for
this is quite simple – we cannot wipe out the auditory experiences of two hundred
years by an act of will. Musically literate modern audiences will have heard Brahms,
Wagner, Bruckner, Mahler et al., and even those who do not frequent the concert
hall will have picked up much of the musical language of these composers via
popular music (for example, the many film scores written by Mahler’s pupils) and
this will colour the way they hear Beethoven; there is no way this influence can
be eliminated.
    The analogy here is, I hope, clear. Theory of International Politics was published
in 1979. This was before the rapid expansion of rational-choice analysis and formal
theory characteristic of much (US) IR of the last three decades; the framing of such
work in terms of ‘neorealism’ and ‘liberal-institutionalism’ in the 1980s and more
recent debates over relative versus absolute gains, offensive versus defensive realism,
balancing strategies, soft-balancing and bandwagonning; the arrival also in the 1980s
of the so-called Third Debate, with post-structuralist theory, Frankfurt-style critical
theory, feminism and gender studies making an entrance; the addition of Lacanian
psychoanalysis to the list, and the rise of multiple varieties of constructivism in the
1990s and 2000s; the recent revival of interest in classical and Augustinian realism,
and the Just War tradition; the attempt to establish Carl Schmitt as a canonical fig-
ure in IR; the emergence of debates on global distributive justice and more widely
the emergence of international political theory as a recognisable sub-field; and, more
parochially, the establishment of the ‘English school’ as a putatively distinctive
approach to IR. And all this has been in the realm of theory – the end of the Cold
War is also worthy of note. Of course, many of these developments were stimulated
by readings of Waltz’s work, or developed in opposition to such readings, but the
musical analogy holds – post-Beethovenian musical language was, one way or
another, heavily influenced by Beethoven’s work but it still makes it impossible to
listen to Beethoven with early nineteenth-century ears. Similarly, how are we, in
2009, to read Waltz’s work without everything that has happened in the field since
then influencing our judgements?
    The question seems to answer itself: it simply is not possible to achieve the kind
of distance that this approach to reading a text requires. But we can at least make the
effort, and, as it happens, I am well placed to make a shot at this task, because in 1980
I wrote a review essay on John Burton’s Deviance Terrorism and War and Waltz’s
Theory of International Politics, which means I can at least see how I thought about
things then, before all the developments listed in the previous paragraph.8 Moreover,
although about half of the essay was dedicated to Waltz, the main focus of the piece
was on Burton, and my take on Waltz was written sine ira et studio which makes it,
260                        INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 23(2)

I think, a more useful document. I may have been grinding axes, but not with a view
to cutting down the author of Theory of International Politics.
    Re-reading my own text for the first time in a quarter of a century has been an
interesting experience. The first thing it brings to light is not strictly relevant to my
topic here, but of interest nonetheless, and that is the focus on the nature of structure
in the first response to Waltz’s text. As is now almost entirely forgotten, the most
immediate reaction to Waltz’s argument (which was first presented in The Handbook
of Political Science in 1975) was a prolonged response from Morton Kaplan, who
took exception to Waltz’s critique of his conception of a ‘system’; Waltz distinguishes
between the systems level properly conceptualised, and the level of interacting units,
and accused Kaplan of failing to grasp this distinction in his famous text System and
Process in International Politics.9 To my mind – and, given my interest at the time
in structuralist and neo-Marxist theories of international relations, this was an
important issue to me – Waltz had much the better of this debate, but was vulnerable
to the charge that his version of structure was no more capable of showing how
structure was transmuted into process than Kaplan’s. To make this point I refer
in the review to the Marxist literature on the subject, and E. P. Thompson’s recent
critique of Louis Althusser, The Poverty of Theory.10 Thompson suggests the need
for ‘junction concepts’ and lays great stress on the notion of ‘experience’. All this has
quite a bit of resonance in terms of later constructivist thought, the agent–structure
debate and, more recently, of critical realist theory. Interestingly, Ashley would
also use Thompson’s work in his critique of ‘the poverty of neorealism’ in his 1984
International Organization article.
    More to the point of this essay is the way in which I, in 1980, understood Waltz’s
relationship with past realist writers. The simple answer is that I identified no great
discontinuity here. Due attention is paid, of course, to the fact that Waltz presents
his argument via a Popperian account of scientific method that certainly was not
to be found in the classic texts of realism, and that he draws a distinction between
reductionist and systemic theories that is somewhat different from that employed
by those texts, insofar as they employ such a distinction at all, but these points
of difference are outweighed by the substantial similarities between his overall
conception of the world and that of the classics. He presents a strong and sophisticated
account of the working assumption that states are unitary actors, a ‘masterly’ critique
of theories of interdependence (and it is indeed masterly I should add, and still very
much worth reading, especially if you substitute ‘globalisation’ for ‘interdependence’
when the term appears in the text), and a subtle discussion of the balance of power –
all key issues for the classical realists. Hence my judgement then that Waltz remains
firmly in the ‘conventional mainstream’ of realist thought.
    So many people have subsequently disagreed with this assessment that an ele-
ment of auto-critique may be called for here. In my review I picked up Waltz’s use of
the terminology of a self-help system and his use of economic models, and I critiqued
his assumption that he was producing explanatory (as opposed to ‘metaphysical’)
theory – but I did not anticipate that these positions would transmute into the
rational-choice versions of neorealism subsequently popular, and that the behaviour
            STRUCTURAL REALISM, CLASSICAL REALISM AND HUMAN NATURE                     261

of egoistic actors under anarchy (the ‘anarchy problematic’) would be studied by
the use of increasingly complex econometric models. In my defence, I suspect Waltz
himself did not anticipate this denouement – later statements and interviews sug-
gests as much.11
    Still, even accepting that there are elements of the argument I did not pick up then,
it still seems there is a big gap between my take on Waltz’s position in 1980 and its
later reception. How is this gap to be explained? There are two reasons, I think – one
a matter of rhetoric, the other a matter of substance. The rhetorical points concern,
first, the way in which authors present themselves, and, second, the way in which
they critique others. As to the first point, there is a basic divide to be seen in academic
argumentation between those who in their own work stress continuity and those who
stress rupture. In practice, we all stand on the shoulders of giants, and there is always
a degree of continuity between even the most innovative work and past efforts in the
field – the difference is whether, and to what degree, any particular writer is moved
to acknowledge that link. Waltz, in Theory of International Politics, is closer to the
latter camp than the former; he does not make positive claims for great originality,
but neither does he emphasise the links between his work and that of earlier realists
(as we will see below, Man, the State, and War is a different kind of book, and there
the problem is rather of discerning when Waltz is speaking in his own voice, and when
he is reporting the work of others). There is an interesting contrast here with, say,
Robert Gilpin, whose response to being identified as a neorealist by Richard Ashley
was to deny vigorously the charge, stressing the way in which he represents the rich
tradition of political realism.12 In the same collection Robert Keohane suggests that
Waltz ‘[reformulates] and systematizes Realism, and thus develops what I have called
Structural Realism, consistently with the fundamental assumptions of his classical
predecessors’,13 but, in his own response, Waltz simply does not address the issue
of continuity with the past; he notes Richard Ashley’s charge that ‘[older] realists,
despite some limitations, set a high standard of political reasoning from which I and
other neorealists have regressed’, and he notes Keohane’s position cited above, but
responds directly to neither charge.14 Instead he simply sets out in detail and defends
his original arguments.
    This insouciance is, in many ways, admirable, but it does help critics to make the
point that his work represents a clear break with the past, if they wish to do so – and
they often will, because this leads into the second rhetorical point about the way in
which academics criticise each other. A very familiar ploy here is the one Waltz notes
in his comment on Ashley. In order to undermine the position of an author with whom
one disagrees quite profoundly, it is helpful to be able to make the case that their posi-
tion does not simply contradict one’s own but also that of some acknowledged past
masters within the author’s own discourse. In effect, the ploy is to try to use people
who would have been your enemies in the past to combat someone who is your enemy
in the present. These figures from the past are praised for their sagacity in order to
belittle the present foe.
    In fact, of course, this is usually little more than a rhetorical trick. For example,
Ashley refers favourably to E. H. Carr in the aforementioned essay as an example of
262                         INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 23(2)

someone who was steeped in the diplomatic culture of the past and who exhibited
superior wisdom and judgement to Waltz, who has remained pretty firmly ensconced
in the world of the academy. Actually, one cannot help feeling that Carr would have
had very little time for the kind of post-structuralist work favoured by his admirer,
and as to Carr’s allegedly superior judgement, I suppose support for the appeasement
of Hitler before 1939, and of Stalin after 1945, could be described in those terms, but
not by me. But this is beside the point, because Ashley’s invocation of Carr has very
little to do with Carr’s work and everything to do with using him as a stick to beat
Waltz with. Waltz spoils the game slightly by not responding, but the very lack of a
response does feed the predispositions of those who want to see him as instituting
a rupture with the past.
    But, although this is part of the story, it is only part of the story – there is another
reason why Waltz’s work is seen as instituting a serious break with the past and that
concerns the much wider issue of how that past is understood. What actually are
the roots of realism, and is Waltz’s structuralist account actually out of line with
those roots? The rest of this article is devoted to this question, and, as will become
apparent, the matter hinges on an examination of the role of human nature in classical
realist thought. The argument for a rupture between Waltzian neorealism and clas-
sical realism rests partly on the proposition that human nature plays less of a role
for Waltz than it does for the classics – I want to suggest that while this is indeed
the case, the way in which Waltz handles the issue of human nature can be related to
both the major strands of realist thought, although, at the same time, it is distanced
from them.


Waltz, human nature and the roots of realism

The central problem for those who wish to argue against the discontinuity thesis is
simply stated. Waltz is absolutely clear that what he is presenting is a theory of the inter-
national system, and that theories based on other levels, the individual or the state, that
is, ‘reductionist’ theories, are profoundly unsatisfactory – but, on the face of it, most
of the authors who are usually seen as the key figures in a genealogy of realism offer
precisely such theories. The Machiavellian tradition of raison d’état is essentially
based on a theory about the conduct of foreign policy and rests on a particular
conception of what human beings are like; the Hobbesian account of an international
‘state of nature’ again rests explicitly on an anthropology, as the structure of Leviathan
makes very clear; the Augustinian roots of Niebuhr’s (and perhaps Morgenthau’s)
realism are firmly embedded in the notion of original sin and fallen man.15
    Certainly one can find ‘structuralist’ positions in classical authors. Thucydides
is an interesting case here. At the beginning of his history he states that the truest
cause of the war whose story he is about to tell is ‘the one least openly expressed,
that increasing Athenian greatness and the resulting fear among the Lacedaemonians
made going to war inevitable’, which sounds like a clear structuralist argument
(indeed an embryonic statement of the security dilemma).16 He makes the structuralist
case more explicitly later in the text when he puts into the mouths of the Athenian
           STRUCTURAL REALISM, CLASSICAL REALISM AND HUMAN NATURE                     263

representative the proposition that they were compelled to expand their empire
by necessity, and that the Spartans would have done the same had they been in a
similar situation – the Athenian speech here is a nice early statement of the tenets
of ‘offensive realism’.17
   Waltz understandably cites these and similar passages in Thucydides – the
problem is that one can find with equal ease statements in the same source which
put the real driving force behind the war elsewhere. In the same speech cited above,
the Athenians state:

   [we] have done nothing remarkable, nor contrary to ordinary human behaviour,
   if we not only accepted an empire when it was offered but also did not let it
   go, submitting to the great forces of prestige, fear and self-interest – not as the
   originators of such conduct, moreover, since the rule has always existed that
   the weaker is held down by the stronger.18

Later, the Athenians make the same point in the ‘Melian Dialogue’: ‘According to
our understanding, divinity, it would seem, and mankind, as has always been obvious,
are under an innate compulsion to rule whenever empowered.’19 Human nature is
the driving force, to which individuals and peoples must submit, are under an innate
compulsion.
   The other classical writer favoured by structural realists is Rousseau, whose
parable of the stag hunt is a staple for students of rational choice and the logic (and
dilemmas) of collective action. Thus:

   If it was a matter of hunting a deer, everyone well realized that he must remain
   faithfully at his post; but if a hare happened to pass within the reach of one of them,
   we cannot doubt that he would have gone off in pursuit of it without scruple and,
   having caught his own prey, he would have cared very little about having caused
   his companions to lose theirs.20

This is frequently used to illustrate the imperatives of a self-help system: ‘everyone’
would behave in this way because everyone would behave in this way – in other
words we have to assume that if we do not chase the hare someone else will, or if we
are the only person who has seen the hare and so this does not apply, we have to
assume that there may be another hare which someone else will see and chase, and
so on. Either way the stag will be lost and we will go hungry, so we had better act
now. But, again, it is the assumptions that Rousseau makes about human nature that
do the work in this case; it is because human beings are unscrupulous in the pursuit
of their own interests, and have little concern for the interests of others that they act
in this way.21
    In short, both Thucydides and Rousseau are ultimately offering first-image
accounts of the motor of realism – and they are the best friends Waltz can find within
the classical literature on the subject. For Augustine and the Augustinians, ancient and
modern, political leaders are obliged to operate in a fallen world – the city of man as
264                        INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 23(2)

opposed to the city of God – and therefore must be wise and prudential (also, it is to
be hoped, just) wielders of power, and this has nothing to do with structural features
of the international politics of late antiquity (or the early twenty-first century). For
Augustine, the hierarchical polity that was collapsing around his ears was as much a
context as the incipient anarchical system being created by the barbarian tribes who
were overrunning the Empire.22 Again, Machiavelli simply takes it for granted that
politics is about the pursuit of interests; thus, the unstated assumption is that Duke
Valentino seeks to extend his power simply because he can – no further explanation
is required – and if you want to preserve your power, or that of the city (The Prince),
or to preserve republican forms of government (The Discourses), you had better be
aware that this is the way of the world.
    Without labouring the point further, I suggest a key feature of Waltz’s thought
and one that genuinely distinguishes it from classical realism, is that his theory of
international politics is not derived from a theory of human nature, or even explicitly
in reaction to a theory of human nature – indeed ‘human nature’ does not even
appear in the index of Theory of International Politics. In Man, the State, and War,
of course, it does appear but of the three images set out therein, the first two (‘man’
and ‘the state’) are collapsed into one category in Theory of International Politics –
‘reductionism’. Interestingly, when Waltz wants to illustrate the follies of this way
of thinking, it is to a theory of foreign policy (Lenin’s theory of imperialism) that he
turns, and not to a theory of human nature. Why so?
    For the answer to this question we have to examine the complex picture of human
nature presented in Man, the State, and War. This is not as easy as it might be thought
to be, because – unlike Theory of International Politics – this is a book that is built
round a series of interlocking debates between different authors, classical and modern,
and it is not always as clear as it might be what Waltz himself thinks on the subject.
So, for example, at the outset to that book we have the bald statement ‘[our] miseries
are ineluctably the product of our natures. The root of all evil is man, and thus he
himself is the root of the specific evil, war’ (p. 3), which Freyberg-Inan in her generally
excellent book on realism and human nature takes to be an expression of Waltz’s
own view; she comments, correctly, that in this he sounds like St Augustine.23 The
problem is that while Waltz may indeed endorse this position, it actually occurs in
the course of a discussion of precisely the Augustinian perspective that it is supposed
to resemble, and it could well be (and probably is) simply a summary of that position.
If it is Waltz’s view then the use of the term evil is interesting here, adding an unex-
pected theological dimension to what is otherwise, as noted above, a frequently ex-
pressed realist position, but, in any event, what is more significant is that it is clear
from the rest of the book that Waltz believes that this sort of generalisation about
human nature actually gets us nowhere, and a different kind of explanation for war
is needed. Why? Given the general thrust of his argument elsewhere, one might have
expected him to argue that because human nature is a constant it cannot explain war;
war is the product of a particular set of social arrangements and must be understood
in that context, reductionist theories will not do, and so we must move to the third
image. Had he taken such a route he would have aligned himself with those realist
            STRUCTURAL REALISM, CLASSICAL REALISM AND HUMAN NATURE                     265

writers who emphasise an unchanging human nature (Thucydides, Machiavelli and
Hobbes) even if, unlike those predecessors, he does not think that ultimately this
nature matters very much.
   But, it seems, that this is actually not why he moves away from human nature.
Rather, it is first because, in any scientific sense, the content of human nature is
unknowable, but second, and more importantly, it is because, contra the position
outlined above, human nature is actually a variable, not a constant. Thus:

   [Because] of the difficulty of knowing such a thing as a pure human nature, because
   the human nature we do know reflects both man’s nature and the influence of his
   environment, definitions of human nature such as those of Spinoza and Hobbes
   are arbitrary and can lead to no valid social or political conclusions (p. 166).24

Here Waltz is discussing the critique of these accounts of human nature allegedly put
forward by Montesquieu and Rousseau, but it is, I think, clear from the context that
he is endorsing this position.25 Reconstructing and rearranging his argument, it seems
to be that while we humans do indeed have a nature, and perhaps, judging from the
existence of evil in the world, that nature is such that sometimes evil consequences
flow from it, we cannot actually specify this nature much beyond that, at least not in
any scientific way, and, in any event, in practice, nature and nurture cannot be treated
separately; therefore an emphasis on human nature gets us nowhere if we want to
understand social phenomena.
    This is quite a complex position, which touches base with the major strands of
classical realist thought, but at a tangent. The initial emphasis on evil, if it were to be
the case that this is indeed his emphasis, would link Waltz to the ‘righteous realists’,
the Augustinian strand of thought identified by Joel Rosenthal, Alastair Murray and
others.26 But the Augustinians actually draw political conclusions from this position;
their realism is a realism of prudence, where we are enjoined to question our own
presuppositions and values (because we are fallen beings every bit as much as are our
enemies), and to turn away from ambitious projects of social reform, which are
doomed to failure because of the imperfect human material from which societies
are constructed – human beings may strive to be moral (although, for Augustine, they
can only achieve this status by God’s grace, not by their own efforts), but collectivities
will always be egoistic.27 There is, I suspect, little here with which in practice Waltz
would disagree (which is one of the reasons why Freyberg-Inan might be right in
assigning the ‘evil’ statement to him), but he does not get to this position by the
Augustinian route, even if he has the same starting point. From his perspective, and
given his commitment to social science, and to a particular version of what social
science involves, the Augustinian route leads into a dead end. In the terminology
of Theory of International Politics this is metaphysics, and he, Waltz, is engaged in
science. One cannot build a model on this kind of foundation, even if the foundation
is, in some sense, sound; Augustinian realism does not generate testable hypotheses
and ultimately it remains a branch of belles-lettres. From a Waltzian perspective this
is also, I think, the problem with Morgenthau’s theory – Morgenthau wants to be
objective and present scientific laws of politics, but his metaphysical commitments get
266                        INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 23(2)

in the way, although, for many, of course, it is Morgenthau’s so-called ‘metaphysics’,
his critique of positivism, as set out in, for example, Scientific Man vs. Power Politics,
that is his most attractive feature.28 In short, Waltz is not an Augustinian realist, even
if he shares some of the pessimism characteristic of that genre.
    Neither does he follow Hobbes, Spinoza, Machiavelli et al. by rooting his theory
in the drives produced by an unchanging human nature. But, again, there are points
of contact with this strand of realism; he may not see human nature as constant, but
he does, I think, share with these authors the view that the interests of states, which
are ultimately generated by human nature, are, more or less, constant – the difference
being that from his perspective these interests have to be seen as exogenous to a
theory of the international system. States desire to survive and it is this desire which
leads them to arms-race, or to form balances or whatever; we do not need to ask why
states desire to survive, they just do. From his perspective, to push the question further
takes us into areas which it is not reasonable to expect a theory of the international sys-
tem to be concerned with. It is this approach to interests – as constant but exogenous –
which has dominated the thought of the ‘rational choice realists’ who have built on
Waltz’s work to construct modern neorealism by redefining the field as the study of
how egoists pursue their exogenously given interests under conditions of anarchy –
and indeed of their cousins, the liberal institutionalists who have offered a different
reading of the possibilities of the anarchy problematic, but take the same view of
interests (or ‘preferences’ as Andrew Moravcsik would have it).29 And, of course, it
is this position that has been so effectively criticised by constructivist writers such
as Friedrich Kratochwil and Harald Müller.30 Values and interests should not be
taken as given but must be understood as produced in discourse: that is, produced in
a relationship. As Kratochwil puts it, one root of the word ‘interest’ is ‘inter-esse’,
‘the in-between of the me and the you’.31 On this account, it simply is not possible to
produce a theory of international politics that is isolated from other levels of social
and inter-personal interaction.
    Still, without remotely wishing to suggest that Waltz is a proto-constructivist,
it seems to me that there are elements of his thinking that would be rather more
compatible with this critique than one might expect; the aspects of the work of the neo-
realists and liberal institutionalists criticised by Kratochwil actually owe more to
the Hobbesian account of human nature than they do to the more nuanced story that
Waltz has to tell. Indeed, when Waltz writes of man’s nature interacting with his
environment, one could almost imagine this thought being developed in the direction
of Alexander Wendt’s account of the different kinds of anarchy that might emerge in
different kinds of environments32 – but, of course, Waltz does not wish to go anywhere
near that position, rejecting altogether any line of thought that relies on human nature.
The point is that he excludes human nature because we cannot (or at least do not)
understand it, whereas the rational choice realists treat it as an exogenous variable
because they believe that they do understand it, and that it generates interests the
nature of which can simply be taken for granted. But, on the other hand, for Waltz
although we cannot (or at least do not) understand human nature, we do at least know
that it is quite likely that ‘our miseries are the product of our natures’, which takes us
back to Augustinian pessimism and away from both the rational choice realists and
            STRUCTURAL REALISM, CLASSICAL REALISM AND HUMAN NATURE                     267

the constructivists. Waltz’s thought seems to oscillate between the Hobbesian
and Augustinian poles, touching both while refusing to be identified with either.
    Here, I suggest, is perhaps the most important, and certainly the most paradoxical,
reason why Waltz is so difficult to relate to the roots of realism; it is not because he is
totally separated from those roots, but because he is actually implicated in too many
of them. Whereas we can settle for a Weberian (modified Nietzschean) reading of
Morgenthau and, I would argue, perhaps controversially, a Hobbesian (out of Marx
and Mannheim) reading of Carr, no such shorthand is available to us to summarise
Waltz’s position. It is easiest simply to say that there is a rupture here, and that Waltz
really is the inventor of something called ‘neorealism’, a doctrine which has lost touch
with past realist thought. Easiest perhaps, but inaccurate I think – better would be to
say that finding a shorthand reading of Waltz that relates to the realist past is difficult
because there is too much to say rather than too little.
    Returning to the issue of human nature, so far I have tried to describe Waltz’s
position – but some degree of assessment of that position is also called for. Was he
right to see human nature as essentially unknowable, and variable in its impact?
When Waltz was developing his thoughts on structural realism in the 1970s, human
socio-biology was in its infancy, and the first serious attempt by a scholar to talk about
human nature in a scientifically defensible way – Edward O. Wilson’s Sociobiology:
The New Synthesis – was as unpopular with biologists as it was with sociologists and
anthropologists, and gave no reason for Waltz to change his judgement that there
was nothing useful that a social scientist could say about the subject.33 Indeed, the
most trenchant critique of the scientific pretentions of socio-biology, by Marshall
Sahlins, rejected the discourse on roughly the same Durkheimian, grounds offered by
Waltz for rejecting other kinds of ‘reductionist’ theories.34 Since the 1970s, however,
socio-biology, rebranded as ‘evolutionary psychology’, has developed in ways that
are far removed from the simplicities of Wilson’s work, and now, I believe, demands
to be taken seriously.35 Moreover, neuroscientists such as V. S. Ramachandran and
Antonio Damasio are revealing ways in which human perceptions and behaviours
are crucially shaped and determined by physical processes within the brain.36 And, to
complete the picture, many cultural anthropologists are now rejecting the politically
correct relativism of their disciplinary forebears – perhaps rather disappointingly, it
turns out that the ‘coming of age on Samoa’ was more or less like the coming of age
everywhere else, and Donald Brown has proved that one can write a very substantial
book full of ‘human universals’.37 Add all this material together, and although we may
not know of such a thing as a ‘pure human nature’, we (that is, the scientific com-
munity, broadly drawn) do know a lot more about the subject than we did 30 years
ago. Does this have any implications for Waltz’s position?
    Scholars of international relations have been slow in coming to terms with this
material, and probably the best-known work, by Bradley Thayer, is broadly supportive
of rational-choice, game-theoretic approaches.38 More recent work, however, focuses
on the ways in which choices are made that are not utility-maximising.39 The results
here are rather sobering: for example, there is good evidence that mentally healthy
people tend to exhibit psychological biases that encourage optimism; such biases,
known to evolutionary psychologists as ‘positive illusions’, may well have been
268                            INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 23(2)

adaptive in helping our ancestors to cope with hard times, but nowadays may serve
instead to get us into trouble.40
    It would be difficult to overestimate the importance of this work for international
political theory, and I hope to write more extensively on this topic in the future, but
obviously, any serious assessment would take us far beyond the scope of this particular
article. Still, it is interesting to ask whether, if it is indeed the case that we can now say
rather more about human nature than we could in the 1970s, as I think it is, does what
we can now say actually support the position Waltz took in Theory of International
Politics? Was Waltz right to resist basing his theory on human nature? The answer,
I think, is a tentative yes. Scientific work in this field has indeed identified biases in
judgement some of which are relevant to any theory of foreign policy behaviour –
but, of course, Waltz had no intention of producing such a theory. At the macro level
where he was working, the most relevant finding of the new learning is rather dif-
ferent. It is precisely that while there may be identifiable human behavioural biases
and mechanisms that are the product of evolution and are constant across cultures and
over time, the idea that human nature as such is a constant is not defensible. In the
study quoted above, ‘positive illusions’ were present generally in all populations,
but they varied in intensity between individuals; mental states are important and,
unsurprisingly, depressed people were less likely to have positive illusions that
mentally healthy people; context is central – positive illusions are greater, for example,
‘in situations of ambiguity, low feedback, and where events are difficult to verify’;
culture matters, ‘positive illusions are greater among Western (especially American)
populations than Eastern populations’ (we might have guessed that one as well); and,
finally, they vary according to regime type and decision-making process.41 The point
is that it is precisely because of these variations that it is possible to put together a
theory which is intended to predict when positive illusions will be important – this
is the goal of Dominic Johnson’s recent book.42 If there were to be such a thing as a
constant ‘human nature’ it could not be the basis for theory, which is precisely why
Waltz was right not to construct his theory on such foundations, even if this meant
that, in this respect, he had to part company with his illustrious forebears.
    So, to return to my starting point, how then should we read Waltz – as one in a line
of realist theorists whose work is consistent with the ‘fundamental assumptions of
his classical predecessors’ or as a figure who has broken with the past? The answer
is ‘both and’ rather than ‘either or’. It is impossible to find any figure amongst the
classics who puts things together in the same way that Waltz does, but most of the
things that are put together by Waltz would be familiar to most classical writers. And
this ability to take familiar material and to combine and recombine it is precisely
why Waltz is an undisputed modern classic.


Notes

I am grateful to my colleagues Kirsten Ainley, Kim Hutchings and George Lawson for comments on a much
earlier draft, and to Ken Booth for his characteristically helpful commentary on the original conference
paper; as always, I alone am responsible for errors that remain.
             STRUCTURAL REALISM, CLASSICAL REALISM AND HUMAN NATURE                                   269

 1   Kenneth Waltz, Theory of International Politics (Reading MA: Addison-Wesley, 1979).
 2   Richard K. Ashley, ‘The Poverty of Neorealism’, International Organisation, 38, 1984, pp. 225–86.
 3   Kenneth Waltz, Man, the State, and War (New York: Columbia University Press, 1959).
 4   Frederic Jameson, The Political Unconscious (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1990), p. 60.
 5   Richard K. Ashley, ‘Living on Borderlines: Man, Poststructuralism and War’, in James Der Derian
     and Michael Shapiro (eds), International/Intertextual (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1989).
 6   On this approach see the discussion in James Tully, Meaning and Context: Quentin Skinner and his
     Critics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992).
 7   Unfortunately this does not apply to baroque opera, since, in the eighteenth century, it was customary
     for listeners to drink and chat between the big numbers rather than sit in silence in a darkened opera
     house; this is why Handel operas at Covent Garden or the New York Met are so boring.
 8   J. W. Burton, Deviance, Terrorism and War (New York: St Martin’s Press, 1979). Chris Brown,
     ‘International Theory: New Directions’, Review of International Studies, 7, 1981, pp.173–185.
 9   Morton A. Kaplan, Towards Professionalism in International Theory (New York: Collier Macmillan,
     1979), written largely in response to Waltz’s chapter in Fred Greenstein and Nelson W. Polsby (eds),
     The Handbook of Political Science, vol. 3: Macropolitical Theory (Reading, MA: Addison-
     Wesley, 1975).
10   E. P. Thompson, The Poverty of Theory and Other Essays (London: Merlin Press, 1978).
11   See Kenneth Waltz, ‘Evaluating Theories’, American Political Science Review, 91, 1997, pp. 913–18,
     and ‘Realism Revisited: An Interview with Kenneth Waltz’ (conducted by Fred Halliday and Justin
     Rosenberg), Review of International Studies, 24, 1998, pp. 371–86.
12   See Robert Gilpin, ‘The Richness of the Tradition of Political Realism’, in Robert O. Keohane (ed.),
     Neorealism and its Critics (New York: Columbia University Press, 1986).
13   Robert O. Keohane, ‘Theory of World Politics: Structural Realism and Beyond’, in Keohane,
     Neorealism and its Critics, p. 175.
14   Kenneth Waltz, ‘Reflections on Theory of International Politics: A Response to my Critics’, in
     Keohane, Neorealism and its Critics, p. 322.
15   Morgenthau believed that the objective laws of political realism are based in human nature (Politics
     Among Nations, 5th edn (New York: Knopf, 1978), p. 4), and Ulrich Petersen makes a strong case
     for saying that he had a Nietzschean belief in the centrality of a human lust for power that seeks to
     dominate (Ulrik Petersen, ‘Breathing Nietzsche’s Air: New Reflections on Morgenthau’s Concepts of
     Power and Human Nature’, Alternatives, 24(1), 1999, p. 83). Certainly Michael Smith is persuasive
     in identifying the Weberian roots of modern realism, and Weber was deeply influenced by Nietzsche;
     see Michael J. Smith, The Realist Tradition from Weber to Kissinger (Baton Rouge: University of
     Louisiana Press, 1986). It is a moot point whether this is in any way compatible with Niebuhr’s
     Christian (Augustinian) pessimism, although it produced similar results.
16   Thucydides, The Peloponnesian War, trans. Steven Lattimore (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1998),
     p. 15.
17   Thucydides, The Peloponnesian War, p. 37.
18   Thucydides, The Peloponnesian War. Different translations of the ‘great forces’ offer ‘ambition’
     (Woodruff) or ‘honour’ (Crawley) instead of ‘prestige’; these notions are so closely interwoven
     for the Greeks that distinguishing between them is genuinely difficult, although for us they point
     in somewhat different directions. Paul Woodruff, On Justice, Power and Human Nature: Essence
     of Thucydides ‘History of the Peloponnesian War’ (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1993); Richard
     Crawley’s historic translation is available at: http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/t/thucydides/crawley.
     R. N. Lebow lays stress on the importance of honour to the classical Greeks, but perhaps understates
     the importance of its synonyms, in his The Tragic Vision of Politics: Ethics, Interests and Orders
     (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), and A Cultural Theory of International Rela-
     tions (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008).
19   Thucydides, The Peloponnesian War, p. 298. Crawley is crisper and more poetic: ‘Of the gods we
     believe, and of men we know, that by a necessary law of their nature they rule wherever they can.’
20   J. J. Rousseau, A Discourse on Inequality, part 2, trans. Maurice Cranston (Harmondsworth: Penguin
     Classics, 2003).
21   In fact, Rousseau distinguishes between pre-social human beings who exhibit amour de soi and
     socialised humans who are driven by amour propre; both are the forms of egoism, but the latter
     involves emulation, whereas the former is simply self-centred. Rousseauian realists would like states
     to be driven by amour de soi rather than amour propre.
22   James O’Donnell, Augustine: A New Biography (New York: HarperCollins, 2005), is a fascinating
     new study which places Augustine’s thought firmly in its historical context.
270                               INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 23(2)

23    Annette Freyberg-Inan, What Moves Man: The Realist Theory of International Relations and its
      Judgement of Human Nature (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2003), p. 73.
24    Interesting that Spinoza is mentioned in this context; too little attention is paid by modern IR theorists
      to the work of Spinoza, who is coming to be seen as a much more central figure to the Enlightenment
      than was previously thought to be the case. See Jonathan Israel, Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy
      and the Making of Modernity, 1650–1750 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001).
25    In fact, I think that to Rousseau human nature was a little more important and a little less variable
      than this quotation would imply, but that is not the issue here.
26    See Joel Rosenthal, Righteous Realists (Baton Rouge: University of Louisiana Press, 1991); Alastair
      Murray, ‘The Moral Politics of Hans Morgenthau’, Review of Politics, 58, 1996, pp. 81–107, and
      Reconstructing Realism (Edinburgh: Keele University Press, 1996).
27    Reinhold Niebuhr, Moral Man and Immoral Society (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1932).
28    Hans Morgenthau, Scientific Man vs. Power Politics (London: Latimer Press, 1947).
29    Andrew Moravcsik, ‘Taking Preferences Seriously: A Liberal Theory of International Politics’,
      International Organisation, 51(4), 1997, pp. 513–53.
30    Harald Müller ‘Arguing, Bargaining and All That’, European Journal of International Relations,
      10, 2004, pp. 395–435; Friedrich Kratochwil, ‘Rethinking the “Inter” in International Politics’,
      Millennium, 35, 2007, pp. 495–511.
31    Kratochwil, ‘Rethinking the “Inter”’, p. 502, n 13.
32    Alexander Wendt, ‘Anarchy is What States Make of It: The Social Construction of Power Politics’,
      International Organization, 46, 1992, pp. 391–426, and Social Theory of International Politics
      (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999).
33    Edward O. Wilson, Sociobiology: The New Synthesis (Cambridge MA: Harvard University
      Press, 1975).
34    Marshall Sahlins, The Use and Abuse of Biology: An Anthropological Critique of Sociobiology
      (London: Tavistock Press, 1977).
35    The literature here is vast: for a recent large-scale authoritative and wide-ranging survey see
      R. I. M. Dunbar and Louise Barrett (eds), The Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology
      (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
36    Good popular introductions are V. S. Ramachandran, The Emerging Mind: The BBC Reith Lectures,
      2003 (London: Profile Books, 2003), and Antonio Damasio, The Feeling of What Happens, new edn
      (New York: Vintage Books, 2005). Interestingly, one of the few political philosophers to investigate
      this work is William Connolly, normally seen as a Foucaldian; see his Neuropolitics: Thinking,
      Culture, Speed (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2002).
37    On Samoa, see Dennis Freeman, The Fateful Hoaxing of Margaret Mead (Boulder, CO: Westview
      Press, 1999); Donald Brown, Human Universals (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991).
38    Bradley Thayer, Darwin and International Relations; On the Evolutionary Origins of War and Ethnic
      Conflict (Lexington: University of Kentucky Press, 2004).
39    See, e.g., Stephen Peter Rosen, War and Human Nature (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
      2005), and Raphael D. Sagarin and Terence Taylor (eds), Natural Security: A Darwinian Approach
      to a Dangerous World (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008).
40    See Dominic D. P. Johnson, Overconfidence in War: The Havoc and Glory of Positive Illusions
      (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004). Nobel Laureate Daniel Kahneman comments: ‘the
      bottom line is that all the biases in judgment that have been identified [by evolutionary psychologists]
      in the last 15 years tend to bias decision-making toward the hawkish side’. Cited from Dominic D. P.
      Johnson et al., ‘Overconfidence in Wargames: Experimental Evidence on Expectations, Aggression,
      Gender and Testosterone’, Proceeding of the Royal Society B., 273, 2006, pp. 2513–20.
41    Johnson et al., ‘Overconfidence’, p. 2518.
42    Johnson, Overconfidence. Interestingly, at an ISA roundtable in San Francisco in 2008, Johnson
      presented this argument as a refutation of Waltz, whom he understood, wrongly I believe, to base
      his theory on the constancy of human nature.
