# Source: eylemer-soylemez-2020-refugee-crisis.pdf
# Converted: 2026-03-06 14:39
# Note: Line numbers here differ from PDF page numbers
---

966832
research-article2020
                       WAFXXX10.1177/0043820020966832World AffairsSedef Eylemer and Nagihan Söylemez




                                                                                                         POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS:
                                                                                                       Has the European Union Failed to Respond to the
                                                                                                                       Refugee Crisis?


                                                                                                                        Sedef Eylemer
                                                                                                                     Izmir Katip Çelebi University



                                                                                                                   Nagihan Söylemez
                                                                                                                       Istanbul Bilgi University


                                                                  This study analyzes the effects of supranational governance on the refugee crisis in
                                                                  the European Union (EU). The main argument is that the supranational institu-
                                                                  tions of the EU have often failed to adequately manage the refugee crisis according
                                                                  to its foundational principles of fair burden sharing and solidarity. This failure
                                                                  has gradually discredited the Union’s basic normative principles such as solidarity,
                                                                  hospitality, and respect for human rights. We show that the gaps between certain
                                                                  policies adopted at the Union level and the practices at the national level have wid-
                                                                  ened, and this has led to a familiar defeat of the normative domain by realpolitik,
                                                                  following some central tenets of classical realism. We aim to show that in several ar-
                                                                  eas of EU policy, as well as how individual states have responded to them, national
                                                                  interests and burden shirking, rather than sharing, have unfortunately prevailed.


                                                                  Keywords: European Union, refugee crisis, classical realism, solidar-
                                                                  ity, burden sharing, European agenda on migration, asylum seeking,
                                                                  migration policy, fundamental measures toward human movements,
                                                                  EU’s border security, EU cooperation with third countries, Turkey-EU
                                                                  statement.




                                                                                                                                                     WINTER 2020   315
                                POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS


Bu çalışma, Avrupa Birliği uluslarüstü yönetişiminin mülteci kriziüzerin-
deki etkilerini incelemektedir. Temel varsayım, Avrupa Birliği’nin uluslarüstü
kuruluşlarının, mülteci krizinin yönetiminde, Birliğin temel ilkeleri olan adil yük
paylaşımı ve dayanışma konusunda çoğunlukla başarısız olduğu yönündedir.
Bu başarısızlık, Birliğin, dayanışma, misafirperverlik ve insan haklarına saygı
gibi temel normatif değerlerine olan güveni azaltmıştır. Birlik düzeyinde benim-
senen politikalar ile ulusal düzeydeki uygulamaların arasındaki farklılıkların
artması, normatif alanın, klasik gerçekçiliğin temel ilkelerini izleyen Real politik
tarafından, aşina biryenilgisine yol açmıştır. Bu bağlamda AB’nin birçok politika
alanında, bu alanlarda ulusal devletlerin verdiği yanıtlardan da hareketle, yük
paylaşımından ziyade ulusal çıkarların ve yükten kaçınmanın hâkim olduğunu
göstermek amaçlanmaktadır.

Anahtar Kelimeler: Avrupa Birliği, Mülteci Krizi, Klasik Realizm,
Dayanışma, Yük Paylaşımı, Avrupa Göç Gündemi, Sığınma, Göç Politikası,
İnsan Hareketlerine Yönelik Temel Önlemler, AB Sınır Güvenliği, AB’nin
Üçüncü Ülkelerle Olan İşbirliği, AB-Türkiye Uzlaşısı.


                        POLÍTICA VERSUS PRAXIS:
  ¿HA FALLADO LA UNIÓN EUROPEA EN RESPONDER A LA
               CRISIS DE REFUGIADOS?

Este estudio analiza los efectos de la gobernanza supranacional sobre la crisis de
refugiados en la Unión Europea (UE). El argumento principal es que las institucio-
nes supranacionales de la UE a menudo no han logrado gestionar adecuadamente
la crisis de refugiados de acuerdo con sus principios fundamentales de solidaridad
y reparto justo de la carga. Este fracaso ha ido desacreditando gradualmente los
principios normativos básicos de la Unión, como la solidaridad, la hospitalidad y
el respeto de los derechos humanos. Mostramos que las brechas entre ciertas políticas
adoptadas a nivel de la Unión y las prácticas a nivel nacional se han ensanchado,
y esto ha llevado a la conocida derrota del dominio normativo tan crucial para las
políticas que tratan con los refugiados por la realpolitik siguiendo algunos prin-
cipios centrales de la política clásica de realismo. Nuestro objetivo es mostrar que en
varias áreas de la política de la UE, así como en la forma en que los estados indi-
viduales han respondido, lamentablemente han prevalecido los intereses nacionales
y elusion de las cargas, en lugar de compartirlas.

Palabras clave: Unión Europea, Crisis de refugiados, Realismo clási-
co, Agenda europea de migración, Medidas fundamentales para los


316     WO R L D A F FA I R S
                    Sedef Eylemer and Nagihan Söylemez


movimientos humanos, Seguridad fronteriza de la UE, Cooperación de
la UE con terceros países, Declaración Turquía-UE.


该研究分析了欧盟针对难民危机实行超国家治理的影响。 其主要观点
是，欧盟的超国家组织往往未能根据平等分担问题和齐心协力的基本原
则充分解决难民危机。 这一问题逐渐使得欧盟如齐心协力、热情友好和
尊重人权等基本原则名誉扫地。 该研究表明，在欧盟层面某些政策制定
与在国家层面的具体实践之间的差距正在扩大，遵循古典现实主义的一
些中心原则，这导致了国际现实主义政治对规范原则领域的再次失败。
该研究致力于呈现欧盟在各地区的政策和个别国家的相应实践，以及相
较于共同承担问题，不幸的是民族国家利益至上和逃避承担的情形更为
普遍。

关键字：欧盟，难民危机，古典现实主义，齐心协力，共同承担，欧洲
移民议程，寻求庇护，移民政策，针对人类运动的基本措施，欧盟的边
境安全，欧盟与第三世界国家的合作，土耳其-欧盟声明。



   Before the global coronavirus pandemic hit Europe hard in early
2020, the refugee crisis had become one of the European Union’s (EU)
top agenda priorities. This is so despite the other internal and external
challenges facing the Union in recent years, including the 2008 Great
Recession and Euro crisis, Brexit, the Crimean Crisis, the Ukraine Cri-
sis (Börzel 2015, 8), and the beginning of the Syrian civil conflicts. All
these challenges led to fundamental changes in millions of people’s
lives. Since the European refugee crisis, many people have tried to
reach Europe using dangerous sea routes, hoping to gain refugee status.
In 2015, this mass flow of irregular migrants peaked at over a million
people—nearly 4,000 of whom drowned in the Mediterranean that year
(Ellyatt 2020). The EU’s responses to these events, which mostly change
state by state, characterized the “refugee crisis” as influencing both states
and the Union’s institutions (Bulley 2017, 117).
    The European Commission (EC) declared that the migrant crisis was
over in March 2019 but emphasized an essential need for maintaining a
comprehensive approach to migration management and border protec-
tion across the region (EC 2019a). Although numbers of refugees have
reduced since the peak in 2015, there is uncertainty as to whether the
crisis is indeed over today. UNICEF (2020) reported a 20 percent decrease


                                                       WINTER 2020       317
                                POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS


on 2019 figures regarding the 26,800 migrants and refugees1 that arrived
in Europe via the Mediterranean from January to June 2020. It cited that
COVID-19 border and mobility restrictions contributed to the drop while
also “congest[ing] reception facilities making hygiene measures and
physical distancing difficult” (EC 2019c). Another source cites a total of
48,529 migrant arrivals in the Union from January to September 2020
(Ellyatt 2020). The International Organization for Migration (2020) has
reported well over 100,000 migrants and refugees entering the Union by
sea alone each year for the last six years with 2,299 and 1,283 deaths in the
Mediterranean for 2018 and 2019, respectively. The crisis, and its continu-
ing aftermath, has left deep scars in the Union, particularly for nations
that have borne the brunt of unfair burden sharing, and is currently seen
by practitioners as “dormant rather than resolved” (Ellyatt 2020).
     The crux of the many institutional problems that have surfaced since
2015 was pinpointed by EC (2020) President Ursula von der Leyen in her
September 2020 State of the Union address: “Those countries that fulfill
their legal and moral duties or are more exposed than others must be able
to rely on the solidarity of others in our whole European Union.” In this
article, we cover some of the cases where such reliance on the normative
principle of solidarity has been, and remains, an extremely difficult politi-
cal and policy objective for the Union as a whole and for individual states.
     This study analyzes the effects of supranational governance on the refu-
gee crisis in the context of the EU and the institutionalized mechanisms
that have confounded fair burden sharing among Union members regard-
ing refugees/asylum seeking policy. We aim to show that the supranational
institutions of the EU have often failed to adequately manage the refugee
crisis triggered by the Syrian civil war. This failure of crisis management
has gradually discredited the Union’s basic normative principles of solidar-
ity, hospitality, and respect for human rights. As the gaps between policies
adopted at the Union level and the practices at the national level wid-
ened, the normative domain is often defeated by several key principles of
realpolitik—best articulated in the Classical Realist School of thought. While
solidarity and commonality are principles upon which the ideal functional-
ity of the EU are based, the refugee crisis has demonstrated that national
self-interest in particular retains the upper hand in Europe when it comes to
sharing the burden of refugee placement and hospitality for asylum seekers.

1A refugee is defined as an individual, who “owing to well-founded fear of being perse-

cuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or
political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such
fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country” (United Nations 2010).


318     WO R L D A F FA I R S
                    Sedef Eylemer and Nagihan Söylemez


    This article first discusses briefly the ideas of solidarity and burden
sharing as supranational ideals at the base of the EU. We then develop
how the ideals have been incorporated into the pillars of EU integration
practice and law in its approach to international migration. This is con-
trasted with some relevant principles drawn from the key tenets of classi-
cal realist thought. We next analyze the Union’s recent approaches and
measures toward the refugee crisis from 2015 and pinpoint the areas
where classical realist assumptions still trump the ideals of commonality
and solidarity upon which the EU’s recent and current refugee policies
are based. These areas are relocation; resettlement; return; the Dublin
System of asylum; The European Border Control and Coast Guard; and
the EU-Turkey statement. The final section concludes.

Supranational Ideals: Burden Sharing, Solidarity, and Hospitality
    The EU has faced serious challenges both internally (which has
raised questions in terms of the principle of “solidarity” among member
states) and externally (which has caused problems in terms of the prin-
ciple of “hospitality”). Hospitality, in its simplest form, can be defined
as openness toward foreigners at home as an ethical tradition implying
a sort of moral duty. However, different interpretations of hospitality in
the context of the EU prove how ethical values may vary in terms of sub-
ject and context in foreign policy. For instance, the ethics of hospitality
was emphasized almost unconditionally in the process of Central and
Eastern European enlargement, and in proposals for Balkan enlarge-
ment. Yet, when considering the European Neighborhood Policy, the
practice of hospitality becomes more conditional (Bulley 2014, 175).
The refugee crisis, as Bulley (2017, 118) argued, reveals that the EU’s
hospitality functions rather like an “immune system” which generates
and preserves both the space and the ethos of the EU’s “home” com-
munity from any possible hazard of instability coming from abroad.
The resulting tensions have institutionalized ambiguity in hospitality
practices that simultaneously welcome and exclude (Bulley 2017, 118).
    According to EU Asylum Law, the principle of solidarity is defined as
the fair sharing of the “burden” or “responsibility” of managing an increas-
ing number of asylum seekers among the member states—including the
financial implications of this burden sharing. Solidarity among member
states is also emphasized under the provisions of the Area of Freedom,
Security, and Justice of Lisbon Treaty (Mitsilegas 2018, 197). The main
problems confronting solidarity involve unequal refugee burden shar-
ing throughout the Union and failed regional policy harmonization


                                                       WINTER 2020      319
                                POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS


initiatives. These have led to unduly heavy burdens placed on certain EU
states; increased tensions between some EU states; tensions between states
and regional government directives; and successive layers of increasingly
complex policies that only partially patch over fundamental flaws in the
pillars of the EU approach to migration. The issues have produced what
Thielemann (2017) calls “free-riding and burden-shifting dynamics” that
have rendered the practice of solidarity in the Union regarding the refu-
gee crisis as symbolic, at best. We argue that the EU’s response to the crisis
has demonstrated that national sovereign states privilege their interests
at the expense of a genuine commitment to solidarity. The refugee crisis
has created opportunities for EU member states to harmonize their legal
framework on refugee protection and to cooperate with third countries.
However, as the following sections reveal, classical realism still prevails in
these international affairs. In consequence, we suggest that the EU’s half-
century of progress, which has continued via constituent principles, ideas,
and values, has been considerably undermined.

Fundamental Pillars of the European Union’s Approach to
International Migration
    With the adoption of the Geneva Convention and its Additional Pro-
tocol, state sovereignty was limited to ensure the protection of human
beings from suffering human rights violations and the arbitrary practices
of sovereign states. In line with international efforts, growing regional
developments have achieved some progress regarding human rights
protection alongside the accelerated integration of the EU. Migration,
asylum, policing, and judicial cooperation have become new collective
policy agendas in Europe since the 1970s. The fundamental pillars of
the EU’s approach to international migration have been closely related
to the Union’s integration process. Cross-border movements due to the
devastation of the Second World War (WWII) and the revival of Euro-
pean integration, especially the Single European Act, were the driving
forces of these new agendas. Under the Council of Europe, the establish-
ment of the “Trevi Group”2 in 1976, and the creation of Ad Hoc Groups
on Immigration and Organized Crime3 formed initial efforts to create a
common approach to international migration (Uçarer 2010, 307–308).

2The “Trevi Group,” which was established to combat terrorism, expanded its field of

interests to include illegal immigration and refugee issues in 1980.
3These structures were not formally part of European integration. But they structured

the development of common migration policy through creating intergovernmental
and transnational policy networks (Huysmans 2006, 66).


320     WO R L D A F FA I R S
                       Sedef Eylemer and Nagihan Söylemez


The Schengen Agreement
    The striking step for a common approach to international migration
occurred with the abolition of the internal borders of five European
Community countries4 with the Schengen5 Agreement in 1985. This was
mainly based on the idea of the free and unrestricted movement of peo-
ple across the borders within the Schengen Area (Stancova 2009, 31).
With the creation of the Schengen framework, a coordinated asylum sys-
tem became institutionalized, common visa policy was introduced, and
cooperation in judicial and law enforcement spheres started (Uçarer
2010, 309). Since then, the Schengen Area has expanded with European
integration, currently covering 26 states. Yet the Schengen Area not only
led to the abolition of internal borders, it also led to the rise of external
borders concerning international migration (Huysmans 2006, 85).

Cooperation in the Fields of Justice and Home Affairs: Key Treaties and
Programs
     With the entry into force of the Maastricht Agreement in 1993, Jus-
tice and Home Affairs (JHA) has been defined as the “third pillar” of
the EU. Although it was an important step for developing asylum, migra-
tion rules, and police and justice cooperation under the JHA, the fact
that the JHA was based on intergovernmental dialogue and compromise
diminished its effectiveness. In consequence, policies on visas, asylum,
migration, and the free movement of persons, including third-country
nationals (TCNs), were transferred to the first pillar, under the Title IV
of the Amsterdam Treaty in 1997. Thus, significant parts of the JHA were
communitarized (with the exception of criminal matters). Moreover, the
Schengen system was integrated into the EU’s acquis, significantly Euro-
peanizing this area following the Treaty of Amsterdam. However, the
most important reforms were made with the Lisbon Treaty (which came
into force in 2009) to ensure effective decision-making and policy-mak-
ing mechanisms at the Union level by expanding the scope of authority
of the institutions6 of the Union (Uçarer 2010, 311–15).
     After the Amsterdam Treaty entered into force, the Tampere Pro-
gramme (1999–2004) was framed to create an Area of Freedom, Secu-
rity, and Justice which also built the future of the JHA. The Tampere

4France, Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands.
5In mid-2020, the Schengen area included Iceland, Norway, Switzerland, and Liechten-

stein, as well as members of the European Union, except the United Kingdom and Ireland.
6European Parliament, European Court of Justice, European Council, and the EC.




                                                               WINTER 2020         321
                                 POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS


Programme aimed at a partnership with the origin countries, fair treat-
ment of TCNs, the establishment of a Common European Asylum System,
and the management of migration flows (European Parliament 1999).
The objectives of the Tampere Programme reveal that JHA is not an area
related only to the internal affairs of the EU, but also closely related to
its external affairs (Uçarer 2010, 316). As a result, the Hague Programme
(2004-2009) emphasized both the internal and external dimensions of
security matters (European Council 2005, 1–2). Following the Tampere
and the Hague Programmes, the third multi-year program adopted by
the EU, covering the years 2010–2014, was the Stockholm Program. This
focused on the reassessment and improvement of the relevant regional
legislation. However, the effectiveness of the Stockholm Programme was
low compared with its two predecessors due to the economic, political,
and geopolitical problems of the period. Economically, the recession
started to affect the EU in 2008, and politically, populist policies against
regular and irregular human mobility, which increased with the influ-
ence of the Arab Spring from late 2011, have required new approaches
(Collet 2014, 1–4).

Combating Irregular Migration
    In addition to the above multi-year programs, the Union’s policy on
the external dimension of migration, which had been functioning under
the “Global Approach to Migration” (GAM) since 2005, was re-launched
as the “Global Approach to Migration and Mobility” (GAMM) in 2011
(EC 2011, 3). The GAM framework originally consisted of combating
irregular migration, promoting legal migration, regulating work and resi-
dence permits, and regulating the EU’s partnerships with third countries
in migration management (Yılmaz-Elmas 2016, 39). After the breakdown
of the Arab Spring, the framework, re-launched as GAMM, spanned

      organizing and facilitating legal migration and mobility; preventing and
      reducing irregular migration and trafficking in human beings; promot-
      ing international protection and enhancing the external dimension of
      asylum policy; maximizing the development impact of migration and
      mobility. (EC 2011, 7)

    After all, the enormous human mobility that emerged as a result of the
ongoing internal conflicts in Syria reveals that the existing political frame-
work was inadequate—and the need for new mechanisms capable of deal-
ing with the emergencies surrounding the refugee crisis became painfully


322      WO R L D A F FA I R S
                     Sedef Eylemer and Nagihan Söylemez


clear. Shortly we discuss the most important of these mechanisms, how
they attempted to embody the normative ideals of solidarity and fair bur-
den sharing, and how in practice this has not been a resounding success.
However, before we do so, it is useful to turn briefly to some of the prem-
ises and principles of classical realism that we argue continue to compete
with, and often undermine, EU refugee policies advocating solidarity.

Key Principles of Classical Realism
     It is well known that the principles of realpolitik drawn from classical
realist theory continue to dominate many areas of international relations.
And, as we shall see, recent EU refugee policy and its reception by mem-
ber states is no exception. Three fundamental premises are salient. First,
state centrism refers to the idea that states are the central actors in interna-
tional politics and that they are unitary and rational actors whose purpose
is to maintain security for their citizens (Donnelly 2005, 29–31). The sec-
ond core premise is derived from the Hobbesian view that human nature
is selfish and such unlimited egoistic behavior can only be restrained under
the hierarchical institutions offered and upheld by strong states (Donnelly
2005, 30). Because states are understood as being similar to individuals
(since they are an amalgamation of individuals), the behavior of indi-
vidual states in the international realm is similarly understood to always
pursue their own well-being. This makes them competitive (Jackson and
Sørensen 2013, 66). The third premise of realism concerns anarchy in
international politics. Since there is no powerful higher authority to con-
trol the egoistic behavior of individual states, international relations are
necessarily conflictual, and conflicts are ultimately resolved by war (Jack-
son and Sørensen 2013, 66). Absent any higher authority to make and
enforce laws, every state must look out for its own survival.
     For reasons of parsimony, we cannot cover the details of classical real-
ism in depth here. However, three familiar additional principles are worth
underlining briefly to return to later. First, in classical times, Thucydides
(431 B.C.E.) articulated the “iron law of realism” (Dunne and Schmidt
2004, 169) that “the standard of justice depends on the equality of power
to compel and that the strong do what they have the power to do and
the weak accept what they have to accept” (Thucydides 1972, 400–402).
     Second, Machiavelli ([1532] 2008, 257–83) separated private moral-
ity—fidelity, friendship, honesty, and (Christian) ethics—from the politi-
cal responsibility required for survival. So he famously urged the prince
to behave flexibly and contrary to moral values if required by the practical



                                                         WINTER 2020        323
                               POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS


conditions facing him. The power of the strongest and the detachment of
morality from politics were reworked in modern form by E.H. Carr. For
Carr ([1939] 2015, 98–107), those interested in international politics can
only achieve reality through the analysis of real conditions, not imaginary
assumptions about common interests or morality, since “morality is also the
product of power” (Rynning and Guzzini 2002, 6). The principle was elabo-
rated by Morgenthau: political realism requires an awareness that morality
should not be applied in the policies of states; since moral principles can
and do vary across states, this sort of application might lead to calamities.
Indeed, attempting to rule the world within a single moral framework is to
make the world much more dangerous. As such, he emphasized that poli-
tics and political actions should be approached as an “autonomous sphere”
(Morgenthau [1948] 1993, 5–17).
     A third key principle, traceable to Morgenthau’s ([1948] 1993, 4–5,
31) interpretation of Hobbes, is that the aim of international politics may
be defined in terms of religious, philosophical, social, or economic con-
cerns, but when it comes to realizing these goals, all actors need power
which causes an incessant struggle for power. Contrary to expectations,
neither the abolition of trade barriers nor the establishment of interna-
tional institutions intended to create a harmony of interest to prevent
wars can eliminate the game of power politics (Morgenthau [1948] 1993,
37–39). We now turn to review the EU’s main institutional response to
the refugee crisis and, in doing so, show how the premises and principles
of classical realism noted here appeared in various guises in the key con-
cepts and processes of the European Agenda on Migration (EAM).

The EU’s Response to the Refugee Crisis: The European Agenda on
Migration
    The over 4,000 deaths in the Mediterranean in 2015 (Ellyatt 2020)
revealed that the EU needed to take common action. In this context, an
Emergency Action Plan was initially formed. The plan included strengthen-
ing joint operations in the Mediterranean; developing a systematic strug-
gle against human trafficking; regular meetings to follow developments
via institutions such as EUROPOL; the creation of EU-wide projects for
resettlement; the creation of new return programs; and achieving agree-
ments with third countries (EC 2015c). The EAM, formed in the follow-
ing period, emerged as a new policy adopted in May 2015 for managing
the external dimension of EU migration.
    After the EAM was presented by the Commission in 2015, emphasiz-
ing the fact that migration is not an area to be managed alone by the


324    WO R L D A F FA I R S
                   Sedef Eylemer and Nagihan Söylemez


member states, the Union began to form the necessary building blocks
for a sustainable system—including immediate measures for the refugee
crisis—providing stronger border control (European Union 2017, 1).
Saving lives, combating human trafficking, the relocation of refugees,
and providing international protection were determined as prominent
areas requiring urgent action (EC 2015a, 1–4).
    To ensure the best possible management of human movement, the
EAM was planned to rest on four pillars. Under the first pillar, attention
was drawn to the resolution of the root causes of irregular migration
(such as economic and political turmoil and climate change) as well as
to the fight against human trafficking. The importance of cooperation
with third countries and the need to establish an effective return appara-
tus were also emphasized (EC 2015a, 7). The second pillar of the Agenda
included measurements which prescribe improving the role and capac-
ity of the EU External Bureau of Borders, FRONTEX, promoting actions
such as standard border management across the Union, strengthening
EU coordination in border security services, the revision of the Smart
Borders plan, and increasing the capacity of third countries to manage
their borders (EC 2015a, 10). The third pillar was based on developing
a Common Asylum System, while the fourth pillar aimed to encourage
legal migration options by revising and modernizing the existing system.
To achieve this goal, the importance of establishing a dialogue platform
for economic migration and strengthening the link between develop-
ment and migration were highlighted (EC 2015a, 11–17).
    Despite the medium- and long-term policy prescriptions of the
Union, in practice the most advanced dimension of the EU’s migra-
tion regime is related to combating mixed human flows which consist
of irregular migration and asylum seekers. In this struggle, the goal of
preventing irregular cross-border activities has an important place. As
such, FRONTEX carried out joint operations along land and sea bor-
ders, regulating the external border controls of member states (Hamp-
shire 2016, 539). Legal migration regulation, including areas such as
economic migration and family migration and policies on the integra-
tion of migrants, has also been somewhat regulated at the EU level.
The national level remains the most effective level in decision making
concerning the admissions of migrants and refugees (Hampshire 2016,
540). That is why Faure, Gavas, and Knoll (2015, 9) note that the EU’s
migration governance is hierarchic, since member states harbor peren-
nial opposition and skepticism toward the high-level governance of
human movement through the Union’s supranational bodies.


                                                     WINTER 2020       325
                               POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS


    In the case of the Union’s migration governance, member states
mostly have followed their policy agenda in terms of their own power
and security perceptions, even if these contradict the EU’s common
institutions, ideals, and values. When it comes to the implementation of
solidarity, burden sharing, hospitality, and other measures stipulated by
the Union, observable failures have been recorded in several areas. The
next section outlines the key concepts and processes of the initial steps
of the EAM, before looking in more depth at three of the key failures.

Key Concepts and Processes of the Agenda
   Under the EAM, two packages were adopted by the EU Commission,
the first in May 2015, and the second in September 2015. Six measures
were developed under the first implementation package for an emer-
gency in the Mediterranean. We now examine each in turn.

Relocation
    In terms of humanitarian emergencies, relocation refers to the process
of transferring those people facing immediate danger from conflictual
places to safe places, in which effective protection is provided, within the
country. In the context of the EU, relocation means transferring people
from one member state to another to provide humanitarian protection
(Glossary on Migration 2019, 176). It is one of the main pillars of the
solidarity principle among member states.
    For this reason, the first measure of the EAM was the creation of
an Emergency Relocation Mechanism to share the burdens of Greece
and Italy which faced intensive refugee flows. Based on the Council
resolution of September 14, 2015, the relocation of 24,000 people from
Italy and 16,000 from Greece was adopted under the first implementa-
tion package. With the Council’s September 22, 2015, decision, it was
accepted that, through a temporary mechanism, 120,000 people would
be relocated from Greece and Italy in the following two years. Accord-
ingly, relocation, which started on September 15, 2015, was expected
to be completed by September 17, 2017. The September 15 decision
was accepted by a majority vote, while Slovakia, the Czech Republic,
Romania, and Hungary voted against, and Finland abstained (European
Parliament 2015, 4).
    According to EC (2017a, 1) data, almost 32,000 persons who
needed international protection in Italy (10,265) and Greece (21,238)
were relocated in another EU member state within these two years


326    WO R L D A F FA I R S
                     Sedef Eylemer and Nagihan Söylemez


(2015–2017). The quantitative objective of relocation was, nevertheless,
not achieved as transfer numbers were far below expectations. Although
other developments such as the Turkey-EU Settlement (discussed later)
have reduced irregular flows, some states behaved reluctantly, while oth-
ers, especially Visegrad,7 were highly resistant to relocation quotas.
    The Visegrad nations strongly opposed the relocation quotas set by
the EC and resisted acceptance of asylum seekers (European Parliament
2019a, 1–3). As such, they not only violated the Commission decisions,
but also undermined the principle of solidarity among member states.
This harmed the Union’s moral as well as legal legitimacy. Under the
rule of populist right-wing parties, Poland and Hungary developed rhet-
oric that mandatory relocation programs threatened their national, eco-
nomic, and cultural interests (Euractiv 2019; Meretab 2018). It should
be noted that Slovakia and the Czech Republic held a less critical stance
(Meretab 2018). Nevertheless, together they accepted just 28 persons for
relocation while Hungary and Poland did not accept any for relocation
(EC 2017a, 2).
    These sorts of violations, as classical realists suggest, belie the
true nature of international politics at least in two patterns. First,
from Machiavelli to Morgenthau, almost all classical realists pointed
out the distinction between morality and politics. For them, ethical
reasons cannot substitute or surmount the actors’ interests. That is
why Machiavelli reminded his prince of his political responsibility for
survival, instead of fidelity, ethics, or honesty. In congruence, Carr
criticized utopians for postulating desired ideals as the equivalent of
progress and universal common good without considering the facts of
international politics.
    Second, classical realism assumes that states are unitary rational
actors that maintain security for their citizens and ensure their own
interests and power in an anarchic system. The Visegrad countries
viewed the relocation schemes as a gross interference in their national
sovereignty, jeopardizing their security and interests. Yet the EC initiated
an infringement procedure against Poland, Hungary, and the Czech
Republic for their resistance in meeting their legal commitments regard-
ing the refugee quotas (Meretab 2018). As in all legal systems, avoiding
the fulfillment of legal obligations requires the imposition of specific
sanctions for these actors (Meretab 2018). In fact, this move could only
mitigate their stark opposition to the extent it could affect their power
position in competitive international politics.
7Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia.




                                                       WINTER 2020       327
                               POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS


Resettlement
    Resettlement involves the relocation and integration of individuals
fleeing war or persecution to a safer geographical area—for our pur-
poses, from a third state to an EU member state. The term is often used
to define a process that begins with the selection of refugees to be placed
and ends with their placement in any EU country granting refugee
status, and even naturalization (Glossary on Migration 2011, 84).
    The European Commission Plan, submitted on June 2015, proposed
that 20,000 people who needed international protection would be reset-
tled from third countries to EU countries via voluntary distribution across
Europe over two years (EC 2015b, 4). Also, with the proposal adopted on
July 22, 2015, Norway, Switzerland, Liechtenstein, and Iceland accepted
to participate in the program (European Council 2015, 5–6). Finally,
within the context of the Resettlement Plan, it was decided to place 22,500
people from third countries in 32 EU states (EC 2016a, 3).
    This number of accepted commitments is very low, given the mil-
lions in dire need of international protection. Unfortunately, even this
relatively low quantitative target also could not be achieved during the
two years. According to EC data for 2017, the total number of resettle-
ments, outside the Turkey-EU Statement, was around 18,000 (EC 2017b,
1–2). The current plan aims to resettle over 50,000 persons who need
international protection from third countries, including the Turkey-EU
Statement, with a pledge to resettle over 30,000 refugees in 2020 alone.
Although the Commission has been working on establishing a Permanent
Union Resettlement Framework since 2016 (EC 2019a, 2), such initiatives
have been soundly challenged by the reluctance of member states and
critics from rightist political movements across the Union (EC 2019a).
    Anti-immigration practices in the EU member states also appear to
undermine the normative values, and thus the soft power and legiti-
macy, of the EU in the international arena. For the modern state, sov-
ereignty is commonly defined as “national sovereignty” and non-citizens
are assumed to be a threat likely to erode national sovereignty (Arslan
2017, 29). Hence, the minimum level of acceptance of persons who
need international protection is considered to be appropriately set by
member states. In this context, the political arena, which would be
characterized by positive normative elements, as the common values
of the Union, are replaced by an area where foreigners are defined as
“normative threat.” The normative threat is a psychological tendency
that refers to the intolerance of individuals who feel threatened (Krastev
2017, 94–95).


328    WO R L D A F FA I R S
                      Sedef Eylemer and Nagihan Söylemez


    From a classical realist viewpoint—which acknowledges that the pri-
mary tasks of the state apparatus are to survive and to ensure the safety
of their citizens—it is therefore not surprising that national security con-
siderations surpass the “common values” of the EU. Moreover, it makes
sense that a main reason underlying the psychological tendency of per-
ceiving threats is inextricably related to the pessimistic view of “human
nature” defined in classical realism. As we shall see, the realist goal of
ensuring security—that is, the protection of national sovereignty—has
brought measures that prevent mixed flows, including the influx of
refugees.

Return
    One of the basic building blocks of the international refugee regime
is the prohibition of refoulement.8 This prohibits the repatriation of
persons (who need international protection) to their country or region
of origin if they would not be safe there. In addition to the international
regime under the United Nations, the EU has pursued its goal of taking
these standards a step further both Union-wide and in its relations with
third countries. However, in times of crisis, heightened measures to pre-
vent irregular migration can conflict with obligations to international
law, particularly the prohibition of refoulement. Return mechanisms are
thus subject to criticisms since they can cause indirect violations of inter-
national law,9 as well as criticisms surrounding inadequacies in the pro-
tection that is supposed10 to be provided internationally. This situation
might become clear by considering the autonomy of the political sphere
as detached from law, ethics, or economy as classical realists so pointedly
stated. The answer to the question of why states refrain from fulfilling
their obligations to international law or some moral purposes may be
comprehensible if states do, in fact, consider the political sphere to be
autonomous—regardless of what regional or international directives say.
    Against this backdrop, within the EU, alternatives to the prohibition
of refoulement have been created. Examples include the Dublin Regu-
lation’s deadlock in the asylum system; increased security measures at
the Union’s external borders with the renewed European Border and

8Namely, the principle of non-refoulement.
9The indirect violation of the principle of non-refoulement concerns cases where refu-

gees could be extradited to a country where they would be exposed to a serious risk of
onward removal, and thus could still end up in an unsafe country.
10According to Article 14 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, “Everyone has

the right to seek and to enjoy in other countries asylum from persecution.”

                                                              WINTER 2020         329
                               POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS


Coast Guard; and the conclusion of readmission agreements with third
countries, notably with Turkey. We discuss each of these cases in more
detail next.

Alternative Mechanisms
The Dublin System: The Asylum Procedure of the European Union
    The Dublin Convention, signed in 1990, came into force in 1997
only after all member states signed and ratified it. Before the Dublin
Convention, member states signed “readmission agreements” among
themselves. According to these agreements, asylum seekers could be
returned to safe third countries they had previously passed. The concept
of repatriation to the safe third country was also maintained by the Dub-
lin Convention (Refugee Council Briefing 2002, 1).
    Although the Dublin Convention is considered as the cornerstone
of the European Common Migration Policy, it has been criticized for
causing violations of international human rights and for overburdening
frontier states (Moses 2016). Despite the criticism, the Dublin II Regula-
tions of September 2003 maintained the concept of “third safe country”
(European Council on Refugees and Exiles 2006, 6, 10–11). The Dublin
III Regulations, in force since 2013, brought some responsibilities to
states for the proper assessment of the effects of transfers before the
return of an asylum seeker to another country (Hampshire 2016, 538).
However, the recent refugee crisis once again unveiled the inadequacy
of the Dublin System, leading the Commission to propose some reforms
in 2017. Yet, instead of fundamentally overhauling the Dublin regime,
the Commission added successive supplemental layers to the original
system which have not proven to be particularly successful.
    According to the Commission’s proposal, underlining the unsustain-
ability of the current Dublin System in the face of unexpected events,
the relocation of asylum seekers in other member states should take
effect when it is decided that one of the member states is under intense
pressure. It was proposed to establish a “corrective allocation mecha-
nism” arranged according to the population density and Gross Domestic
Product of the member states. If, however, a member state decided not to
accept asylum seekers from a state under pressure, a “financial solidarity
system” would be required instead, obliging a € 250,000 (for 12 months)
solidarity contribution for each asylum seeker (EC 2016b, 3).
    Although this proposal was aimed to increase the solidarity and
responsibility within the Union, the leaders have still not achieved an


330    WO R L D A F FA I R S
                       Sedef Eylemer and Nagihan Söylemez


agreement (European Parliament 2019a) despite ongoing discussions
for nearly three years. For some member states,11 who have blocked
the unanimity required to move the proposal forward, it contradicts
the principle of subsidiarity (European Parliament 2019a, 7, 11). Hun-
gary rejected any mandatory admittance quota in 2018 and called for
amendments that tightened the System’s security and expulsion policies;
other member states12 have strongly criticized the fairness of the share
of applicants each member state could be expected to take (European
Parliament 2019a, 11). Accordingly, the procedures guiding decisions
on who should be admitted to their country and ensuring that each
financial solidarity contribution is within national competence remain
unresolved and disagreement remains rife. Again, the issue very clearly
revolves around the proposal’s excessive intervention into the sphere of
national sovereignty (Nielsen and Zalan 2017) and reveals how nation-
states, as unitary and rational actors in the classical realist understand-
ing, pursue self-interest at the expense of supporting the supranational
institutionalization steps of the Union. Rather than shoring up the defi-
ciencies in the EAM to enhance the principle and practice of solidarity
in the Union, these proposed supplemental procedures continue to
languish amid squabbles over fairness understood from a national, not
a common, perspective.

The European Border and Coast Guard: The Line between the Union and
Beyond
    In line with the objective of the EAM to increase the security of the
Union’s external borders in the medium and long term, the European
Border and Coast Guard was established in October 2016 on the founda-
tions of FRONTEX (2017, 11) for the effective implementation of Euro-
pean integrated border management. Integrated border management is
defined as the common area of responsibility of the national authorities
and the Union. Its most important components are coastguard mis-
sions which consist of search and rescue operations; monitoring human
movements within and toward the Union; the detection and prevention
of cross-border crimes such as terrorism and human smuggling; the
investigation of threats and internal security risks affecting external bor-
der security; and the evaluation of vulnerabilities and return operations
(FRONTEX 2017, 11).

11Hungary, Slovakia, Czech Republic, Poland, Romania, and Italy.
12Cyprus, Greece, Italy, Malta, and Spain.




                                                            WINTER 2020   331
                                POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS


    In this context, nation-states seem indubitably more willing to
heighten and fortify the walls of the Union, which has been labeled “For-
tress Europe” for many years. The new Bureau raised criticisms on the
ground that FRONTEX has become an EU “return office.” Accordingly,
the task of this new Bureau is to ensure more effective deportation pro-
cedures in the EU (Carrera et al. 2017, 47). These measures reaffirm the
basic paradigms of classical realism in some areas. In the international
arena, where interests are defined in terms of power, the main goal of
preserving the existing power balance consistently with demographic,
economic, or military interests (rather than ethical values and humani-
tarian concerns) has still prevailed. Member states have displayed intel-
lectual solidarity more for controlling and preventing refugee flows
than for sharing the burden among themselves. For instance, Austria,
Denmark, France, Germany, Norway, and Sweden have temporarily
suspended the Schengen rules. These countries introduced internal
border checks from 2015 to the present even though the limit is just
two years—since the current rules are ambiguous and subject to legal
loopholes (European Parliament 2019b). Some have argued that the
extraordinary circumstances of irregular migration flows in 2015 were
self-interestedly extended in this way in 2018–2019 to shirk fair burden
sharing (European Parliament 2019b). It is nevertheless patent that the
effects of the 2020 coronavirus pandemic have legitimately constituted
new extraordinary circumstances for internal border controls across the
Union and thus COVID-19 has eclipsed this particular issue for now.
    Other indicators of controlling and preventing refugee flows and
fortifying borders include societal responses such as the increasing
influence of populist political groups across the region, one of which
is “Alternative for Germany” in Germany, and most importantly Brexit in
the United Kingdom. Two key populist elements, national sovereignty
and immigration restrictions, drove the official slogans of the Brexit
campaign and subsequent negotiations with the EU: Farage’s “we want
our country back” and May’s “control of our own laws” (Morillas 2017).
The Euroskeptic flavor of sovereignty issues and the widespread per-
ceived unfairness of European control over U.K. borders and immigra-
tion policy13 in Britain certainly revealed that national sovereignty—and

13Britain opted into the minimum standards of treatment and conditions set by the first

round of agreements of the Common European Asylum System in 2005, but opted out
of the second round that set common (i.e., higher) standards of treatment/reception
in 2013 on the grounds of preserving national sovereignty over its laws and borders
regarding refugees.


332     WO R L D A F FA I R S
                   Sedef Eylemer and Nagihan Söylemez


therefore national interests—were driven from the societal level and led
to international outcomes in a way classical realists would expect. Brexit
is a clear indication that the Union’s harmonization policies and insti-
tutional response to solidarity and burden sharing have not been able
to overcome the prevailing realist principles of national interest and
sovereign control of national borders and laws.
    The most recent Union proposal in the area of burden sharing
occurred on September 23, 2020, when the EC unveiled a new “com-
pulsory solidarity” plan that bears even more hallmarks of a politically
realist attempt to appease anti-migrant member states (France 24 2020).
EC President von der Leyen was reported to have said, “‘We want to live
up to our values, and at the same time face the challenges of a global-
ized world’ . . . warning that the old system ‘no longer works’” (France 24
2020). Instead of the compulsory quotas for refugee settlement hoped-
for by human rights and refugee activists, the plan is proposing harsher
border controls and quicker procedures for expelling rejected asylum
applicants (France 24 2020). It also proposes that member states not
wishing to volunteer to take more migrants “can instead take charge of
sending those whose asylum requests are rejected back to their home-
lands” (France 24 2020) in place of the mandatory relocation quotas
that so many member states have resisted (Palaiologos 2020). Praxis is
indeed trumping the normative values at the base of former EU refugee
policy here. Or, at the very least, the principle of solidarity is morphing
to take on a much more practical, less normative, meaning than before.

The EU-Turkey Statement: Beyond Borders
    Because of its geographic proximity and position, Turkey is an impor-
tant actor for EU border security and migration management. Indeed,
the Union’s dealings with Turkey could well have been an opportunity
for the EU to demonstrate its political will to cooperate in genuine soli-
darity with countries outside its borders; countries that impact deeply
upon EU concerns like the refugee crisis. By 2015, the EU’s migration
management and border security opened a new era in Turkey-EU rela-
tions (Benvenuti 2017, 4). While the parties have mutually lost faith in
each other regarding the readmission agreement and a visa liberaliza-
tion process (EC 2014)—touted to introduce a visa waiver for Turkish
citizens entering the EU—the Joint Action Plan and the Turkey-EU
Statement were signed in November 29, 2015, and on March 18, 2016,
respectively. In this context, the deepening of the refugee crisis in a way
contributed to the restoration of deteriorating Turkey-EU relations for


                                                      WINTER 2020       333
                               POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS


a while (Saatçioğlu 2016). However, in the following period, the positive
atmosphere in relations was again interrupted (Nas 2016, 31).
    The Joint Action Plan attempted to handle the refugee crisis in three
ways. First, it threw into sharp relief the reasons underlying the mass
influx of Syrians; second, through the Plan, the EU committed itself to
support those Syrians under temporary protection in Turkey; and third,
the Plan aimed to develop cooperation between the parties for the pre-
vention of irregular migration toward the EU (Avrupa Birliği Bakanlığı
2015, 1). On March 18, 2016, Turkey and the EU reached an agreement
to end irregular migration to Europe via Turkish waters (EC 2019b).
According to the agreement, the steps were as follows: (1) irregular
migrants who reached Greece via the Aegean Sea should be returned to
Turkey and, in return, the Union committed to resettling one Syrian for
each return; (2) Turkey committed to taking some measures to prevent
irregular migration toward the Union and, in return, the EU committed
to the Voluntary Humanitarian Admission Plan to offer a legal and safe
resettlement route for irregular migrants “to create a system of solidar-
ity and burden sharing with Turkey” (Council of the European Union
2017). Related commitments by the EU include the acceleration of the
process of visa liberalization for Turkish citizens; taking some steps to
modernize customs union between the EU and Turkey and opening new
chapters in accession negotiations; and providing financial assistance to
improve the protection of refugees in Turkey (European Council 2016).
    As of 2019, tangible results have been achieved by the EU-Tur-
key Statement. The EC (2019b) announced that irregular transitions
decreased by 97 percent; € 3 billion was contracted under the Facility
for Refugees from the EU budget, while almost half of the second € 3
billion—contributed by EU member states—was committed to Turkey
in 2019. Over 20,000 Syrians who need international protection have
been resettled in member states of the Union (EC 2019b). However,
although irregular migration has declined considerably, the Voluntary
Humanitarian Admission Plan has still not yet been launched, leading
to an extended stay of 3.6 million Syrians in Turkey (in addition to over
300,000 refugees from other countries) at a cost several times higher
than the € 6 billion promised by the EU (Global Utmaning 2020).
According to Global Utmaning (2020), Turkey is “currently hosting the
largest refugee population in the world.” Regardless of the incredibly
positive tone of the EC (2019b) situation report, Turkey is clearly one
area where the failures of supranational EU refugee management are
particularly salient.


334    WO R L D A F FA I R S
                     Sedef Eylemer and Nagihan Söylemez


    Visa liberalization has also not been realized due to problems in the
following issue areas: the adoption of measures for the prevention of
corruption, the revision of legislation and practices concerning terror-
ism, to make appropriate arrangements with EU standards on the pro-
tection of personal data, and effective judicial cooperation (EC 2017c,
10). Moreover, Turkey’s progress toward full membership has remained
fraught with difficulties and is now completely stalled. Hence, strategic
partnership options instead of full membership started to be more pro-
nounced in EU circles. Besides, lacking political will toward Turkey’s
full membership has reduced the impact of the policy of conditionality
(Nas 2016, 32). Turkey’s full membership debate can easily become a
factor for pressure in domestic policy areas in the EU member states, so
neither visa liberalization nor full EU membership is likely to take shape
soon.
    Despite the optimistic values-based expectations for the future of
EU-Turkey relations, grounded on the beginning of a new positive and
cooperative era, developments reveal that the EU has followed an inter-
est-oriented approach based on a realist understanding, rather than one
of commonality and even partial solidarity across one of the region’s
most pressured borders. The EU aimed to externalize the refugee cri-
sis through a compromise with Turkey via the EU-Turkey Statement.
Turkey likewise primarily sought its own national progress in accession
negotiations and an assurance for visa liberalization as soon as possible.
As classical realists would identify, the varied interests of these actors
reflect a conflict of interests instead of a real harmony of interests. In
consequence, the Union instrumentalized the negotiation process with
Turkey to achieve its security interests while Turkey prioritized the nego-
tiation talks as well as visa liberalization. Turkey has played a critical role
in preventing mixed flows to the Union—which served the interests of
the EU. Yet the expected progress and benefits from the compromise
for Turkey have not been achieved. The experience is reminiscent of a
famous point from Thucydides, the father of classical realism, underlin-
ing the “iron law of realism”: the strong do what they have the power to
do and the weak accept what they have to suffer (Dunne and Schmidt
2004, 169; Thucydides 1972, 400–402).
    Despite the Union’s stated commitment to the normative principle
of solidarity in the refugee crisis and its aftermath, realist regional self-
interest has prevailed in its practical dealings with Turkey. And the prac-
tical politics of realism have continued to supersede European values
now the refugee crisis has deepened in Turkey in 2020. On one hand, in


                                                         WINTER 2020       335
                               POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS


the absence of sufficient funding and incentives, Turkey has relaxed con-
trols on the movement of the latest influx of Syrian refugees toward the
Greek border, while “European politicians sidestep responsibility and
instead blame Ankara for the situation” (TRT World 2020). It remains
to be seen whether the plight of so many will be used as a political tool
by the regional powers in the months or years to come. The precedents
covered in this article suggest it is, unfortunately, likely that they will be.

Conclusion
    This study has discussed some effects of EU supranational gover-
nance on measures handling the refugee crisis, specifically key mecha-
nisms that have confounded fair burden sharing among Union members
regarding refugees and asylum-seeking policy. We argued that normative
principles, like solidarity and burden sharing, have been incorporated
into the pillars of regional policy and in the attempts of the Union’s
supranational institutions to harmonize national policies within, and
even beyond, the borders of Europe. In practice, though, at both the
national and supranational levels, several self-interested motives more
associated with realist motives belie the normative ideals. Our explora-
tion of the Union’s internal policies managing the refugee crisis (among
member states, and concerning border security policies and initiatives)
and in its cooperation with third countries (as in the case of Turkey-EU
Statement) shows that praxis has continually either trumped or under-
mined the normative ideals set forth in the EAM, as well as in the various
EU policy “band aids” applied subsequently.
    Given the Union’s internal arrangements, as classical realists suppose,
individual states have acted as unitary actors instead of members of a
supranational whole facing a politically devastating crisis in common.
Despite their commitments at the Union level, many have followed
their perceived national security and other national political interests
whenever Union-wide directives for a fairer distribution of the refugee
burden were seen to threaten them. This attitude has led to two key
problems. First, even though member states officially committed to
solidarity with the Union in the management of asylum pressures, they
have been reluctant to engage in burden sharing in practice. Second,
although seeking asylum is a human right, refraining from ensuring this
right due to security interests undermines the legitimacy of the very val-
ues and ideas on which the Union is based. The focus on the return and
repatriation of people in need of asylum rather than on local admission
and integration reflects this attitude. Another example of this attitude


336    WO R L D A F FA I R S
                      Sedef Eylemer and Nagihan Söylemez


has become visible during the negotiations for the Common European
Asylum System, since it has not been established yet mostly due to the
reservations of member states. At the border level, increasing security
measures have also reverberated throughout the EU member states
security concerns toward human movement. The new Bureau, based
on foundations provided by FRONTEX, indicates that even if there are
strong humanitarian imperatives, either denial of entry or the return
of refugee flows to unsafe countries (or to safe countries likely to move
them on again to unsafe ones) may well be prioritized by some member
states. The complex challenge for the EU is in fact less about “striking a
working balance” between the normative principle of solidarity and the
practical considerations of collective responsibility (von der Leyen cited
in Palaiologos 2020), and more to do with its practical ability (or inabil-
ity) to cajole, negotiate, or otherwise force a consensus between radically
self-interested member states on the best ways to handle refugee flows
and effective repatriation. While successes have been seen, the failures
are more than prevalent.
    At the external level, the Turkey-EU Statement appears as potentially
one of the most innovative policy instruments (applied beyond EU bor-
ders) since the adoption of the EAM in 2015. The Statement aimed to
control the largest migration route to the Union via cooperation with
Turkey. Ultimately, the Union achieved many of its expected outcomes
to dampen the influx of refugees to EU states. The Turkish state, how-
ever, did not achieve its aim to join the Union and instead now hosts
the largest refugee population in the world (3.9 million). One strong
indication is that conflicts of interest are still more dominant than the
harmony of interests in bilateral relations between the EU and Turkey,
in line with the principles of classical realism. The September 2020 EC
proposal for “compulsory solidarity” may fare no better in balancing a
genuine commitment to Union-wide solidarity over the refugee situa-
tion and the fair burden sharing it involves against the prevailing practi-
calities of national self-interest.

ORCID iD
Nagihan Söylemez      https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9423-9359.

About the Authors
Sedef Eylemer is an associate professor in the Department of International Relations
and Director of the EU Research Centre at Izmir Katip Çelebi University. She received
her BA in international relations, and MA and PhD in European studies, at Dokuz Eylul


                                                             WINTER 2020         337
                                 POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS


University in Izmir. She was also awarded an MA degree in Mediterranean studies from
King’s College, University of London as the recipient of a Jean Monnet Scholarship.
Her main research interests include EU external relations and foreign policy analysis,
EU migration policy, EU-Turkey relations, and European neighborhood policies.
Nagihan Söylemez is a research assistant in the Department of International Relations
at the Istanbul Bilgi University, in Istanbul, and a PhD candidate in the Department
of International Relations at Dokuz Eylül University, Izmir, Turkey. Her main research
interests are international relations theories, international organizations, European
Union, international migration, and human movements.


References
Arslan, Mutlu. 2017. “İçerdekiler ve Dışardakiler: Ulus Devlet Sisteminde Göçmenliğin
  Siyasal Statüsü (Nationals and Foreigners: Political Status of Migration for Nation
  State).” Ayrıntı 22:25–31.
Avrupa Birliği Başkanlığı. 2015. “Türkiye-AB Ortak Eylem Planı: 15 Ekim 2015 (Direc-
  torate for EU Affairs).” http://www.ab.gov.tr/files/AB_Iliskileri/15_ekim_2015_tur-
  kiye_ab_ortak_eylem_plani_.pdf (accessed May 29, 2017).
Benvenuti, Bianca. 2017. “The Migration Paradox and EU-Turkey Relations.” Istituto
  Affari Internazionali. http://www.iai.it/sites/default/files/iaiwp1705.pdf (accessed
  October 7, 2020).
Börzel, Tanja A. 2015. “From EU Governance of Crisis to Crisis of EU Governance:
  Regulatory Failure, Redistributive Conflict, and Eurosceptic Public.” Journal of Com-
  mon Market Studies 54 (1): 151–62.
Bulley, Dan. 2014. “Foreign Policy as Ethics: Towards a Re-evaluation of Values.” Foreign
  Policy Analysis 10:165–80.
Bulley, Dan. 2017. Migration, Ethics and Power: Spaces of Hospitality in International Politics.
  London: Sage.
Carr, E. H. (1939) 2015. Yirmi Yıl Krizi 1919-1939 [The Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919-1939:
  An Introduction to the Study of International Relations]. Translated by Can Cemgil.
  Istanbul: Istanbul Bilgi Üniversitesi Yayınları.
Carrera, Sergio, Steven Blockmans, Jean-Pierre Cassarino, Daniel Gros, and Elspeth
  Guild. 2017. The European Border and Coast Guard: Addressing Migration and Asylum
  Challenges in the Mediterranean? Brussels: Centre for European Policy Studies.
Collet, Elizabeth. 2014. “Future EU Policy Development on Immigration and Asylum:
  Understanding the Challenge.” MPI Policy Brief. https://www.migrationpolicy.org/
  research/future-eu-policy-development-immigration-and-asylum-understanding-
  challenge (accessed October 7, 2020).
Council of the European Union. 2017. “Memo: Voluntary Humanitarian Admission
  Scheme with Turkey.” https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-14571-
  2017-REV-1/en/pdf (accessed September 22, 2020).
Donnelly, Jack. 2005. “Realism.” In Theories of International Relations, edited by Scott
  Burchill, 29–54. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Dunne, Tim and Brian C. Schmidt. 2004. “Realism.” In The Globalization of World Poli-
  tics: An Introduction to International Relations, edited by John Baylis and Steve Smith,
  162–83. Oxford: Oxford University Press.



338      WO R L D A F FA I R S
                      Sedef Eylemer and Nagihan Söylemez


Ellyatt, Holly. 2020. “‘Saving Lives at Sea Is not Optional’: EU Chief Calls for Unity
   amid Warnings Migration Crisis Is not Over.” CNBC, September 16. https://www.
   cnbc.com/2020/09/16/eu-migration-crisis-ursula-von-der-leyen-calls-for-unity.html
   (accessed September 20, 2020).
Euractiv. 2019. “Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland ‘Breached EU Law’ by Refusing
   Refugees.” November 1. https://www.euractiv.com/section/politics/news/czech-
   republic-hungary-and-poland-breached-eu-law-by-refusing-refugees/ (accessed Sep-
   tember 24, 2020).
European Commission. 2011. “The Global Approach to Migration and Mobility.”
   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52011DC074
   3&from=EN (accessed June 14, 2017).
European Commission. 2014. “Statement of Commissioner Malmström on the Entry
   into Force of the Readmission Agreement between Turkey and the EU.” https://
   ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/STATEMENT_14_285 (accessed
   September 24, 2020).
European Commission. 2015a. “A European Agenda on Migration.” https://ec.europa.
   eu/home-affairs/sites/homeaffairs/files/what-we-do/policies/european-agenda-
   migration/background-information/docs/communication_on_the_european_
   agenda_on_migration_en.pdf (accessed June 11, 2017).
European Commission. 2015b. “Commission Recommendation of 8.6.2015 on a
   European Resettlement Scheme.” https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/sites/home-
   affairs/files/e-library/documents/policies/asylum/general/docs/recommenda-
   tion_on_a_european_resettlement_scheme_en.pdf (accessed July 20, 2019).
European Commission. 2015c. “Joint Foreign and Home Affairs Council: Ten Point
   Action Plan on Migration.” http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15-4813_
   en.htm (accessed June 14, 2017).
European Commission. 2016a. “The EU and the Refugee Crisis.” http://publications.
   europa.eu/webpub/com/factsheets/refugee-crisis/en/ (accessed June 18, 2017).
European Commission. 2016b. “The Reform of the Dublin System.” https://
   www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2016/586639/EPRS_
   BRI%282016%29586639_EN.pdf (accessed October 15, 2020).
European Commission. 2017a. “Relocation: EU Solidarity between the Member States.”
   https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/sites/homeaffairs/files/what-we-do/policies/
   european-agenda-migration/20171114_relocation_eu_solidarity_between_mem-
   ber_states_en.pdf (accessed July 20, 2019).
European Commission. 2017b. “Resettlement: Ensuring Safe and Legal Access to Pro-
   tection for Refugees.” https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/sites/homeaffairs/files/
   what-we-do/policies/european-agenda-migration/20171114_resettlement_ensuring_
   safe_and_legal_access_to_protection_for_refugees_en.pdf (accessed July 20, 2019).
European Commission. 2017c. “Seventh Report on the Progress Made in Implementa-
   tion of the EU-Turkey Statement.” https://ec.europa.eu/neighbourhood-enlarge-
   ment/sites/near/files/20170906_seventh_report_on_the_progress_in_the_imple-
   mentation_of_the_eu-turkey_statement_en.pdf (accessed July 20, 2019).
European Commission. 2019a. “Delivering on Resettlement.” https://ec.europa.
   eu/home-affairs/sites/homeaffairs/files/what-we-do/policies/european-agenda-
   migration/20190619_managing-migration-factsheet-delivering-resettlement_en.pdf
   (accessed July 20, 2019).



                                                              WINTER 2020         339
                               POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS


European Commission. 2019b. “EU-Turkey Statement: Three Years On.” https://
  ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/sites/homeaffairs/files/what-we-do/policies/europe-
  an-agenda-migration/20190318_eu-turkey-three-years-on_en.pdf (accessed July 20,
  2019).
European Commission. 2019c. “The European Agenda on Migration: EU Needs to
  Sustain Progress Made over the Past 4 Years.” https://ec.europa.eu/commission/
  presscorner/detail/en/IP_19_1496 (accessed September 20, 2020).
European Commission. 2020. “President von der Leyen’s State of the Union Address:
  Charting the Course Out of the Coronavirus Crisis and into the Future.” https://
  ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_1657 (accessed Septem-
  ber 20, 2020).
European Council. 2005. “The Hague Programme: Strengthening Freedom, Secu-
  rity and Justice in the European Union.” Official Journal of the European Union.
  http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2005:053:0001:001
  4:EN:PDF (accessed June 17, 2017).
European Council. 2015. “Conclusions of the Representatives of the Governments of
  the Member States Meeting within the Council on Resettling through Multilateral
  and National Schemes: 20,000 Persons in Clear Need of International Protection.”
  http://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-11130-2015-INIT/en/pdf
  (accessed June 17, 2017).
European Council. 2016. “EU-Turkey Statement, 18 March 2016.” http://www.con-
  silium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2016/03/18-eu-turkey-statement/
  (accessed June 29, 2017).
European Council on Refugees and Exiles. 2006. “Report on the Application of the
  Dublin II Regulation in Europe.” European Legal Network on Asylum. https://www.
  ecre.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/ECRE-ELENA-Report-on-the-Application-
  of-the-Dublin-II-Regulation-in-Europe-_March-2006.pdf (accessed October 7, 2020).
European Parliament. 1999. “Tampere European Council 15 and 16 October 1999:
  Presidency Conclusions.” http://www.europarl.europa.eu/summits/tam_en.htm
  (accessed March 23, 2017).
European Parliament. 2015. “Legislation on Emergency Relocation of Asylum-seekers
  in the EU.” http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2015/569018/
  EPRS_BRI%282015%29569018_EN.pdf (accessed July 23, 2019).
European Parliament. 2019a. “Reform of the Dublin System.” http://www.europarl.
  europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2016/586639/EPRS_BRI%282016%29586639_
  EN.pdf (accessed July 20, 2019).
European Parliament. 2019b. “Tanja Fajon: ‘If We Lose Schengen, We Will Lose
  the European Project.’” https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/
  security/20181116STO19210/schengen-suspension-how-long-should-internal-bor-
  der-checks-last (accessed September 20, 2020).
European Union. 2017. “A European Agenda on Migration: State of Play.” https://
  ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/sites/homeaffairs/files/what-we-do/policies/european-
  agenda-migration/20170302_eam_state_of_play_en.pdf (accessed April 16, 2017).
Faure, Raphaëlle, Mikaela Gavas, and Anna Knoll. 2015. “Challenges to a Compre-
  hensive EU Migration and Asylum Policy.” Oversea Development Institute. http://
  ecdpm.org/wp-content/uploads/ECDPM_ODI_Migration_EU_Policy_2015.pdf
  (accessed June 28, 2017).



340    WO R L D A F FA I R S
                       Sedef Eylemer and Nagihan Söylemez


France 24. 2020. “EU Unveils ‘Compulsory Solidarity’ Plan to Share Burden of Migra-
   tion.” September 23. https://www.france24.com/en/20200923-eu-to-present-new-
   plan-on-asylum-seekers-austria-warns-against-mandatory-quotas (accessed Septem-
   ber 24, 2020).
FRONTEX. 2017. “Risk Analysis for 2017.” http://frontex.europa.eu/assets/Publica-
   tions/Risk_Analysis/Annual_Risk_Analysis_2017.pdf (accessed June 28, 2017).
Global Utmaning. 2020. “The EU-Turkey Statement on Migration: Three Years On.”
   https://www.globalutmaning.se/utblick/eu-turkey-statement-migration-three-
   years/ (accessed September 24, 2020).
Glossary on Migration. 2011. “Geneva International Organization for Migration.”
   https://publications.iom.int/system/files/pdf/iml25_1.pdf (accessed October 15,
   2020).
Glossary on Migration. 2019. “Geneva: International Organization for Migration.”
   https://publications.iom.int/system/files/pdf/iml_34_glossary.pdf (accessed June
   28, 2019).
Hampshire, James. 2016. “European Migration Governance since the Lisbon Treaty:
   Introduction to the Special Issue.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 42 (4):
   537–53.
Huysmans, Jef. 2006. The Politics of Insecurity: Fear, Migration and Asylum in the EU. New
   York: Routledge.
International Organization for Migration. 2020. “IOM: Mediterranean Arrivals
   Reach 110,699 in 2019; Deaths Reach 1,283. World Deaths Fall.” United Nations.
   https://www.iom.int/news/iom-mediterranean-arrivals-reach-110699-2019-deaths-
   reach-1283-world-deaths-fall (accessed September 20, 2020).
Jackson, Robert and George Sørensen. 2013. Introduction to International Relations: Theo-
   ries and Approaches. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Krastev, Ivan. 2017. “Çoğunlukçu Gelecekler (Majoritarian Futures).” In Büyük Gerileme:
   Zamanımızın Ruh Hali Üstüne Uluslararası Bir Tartışma, edited by Heinrich Geisel-
   berger and translated by Merisa Şahin, Aslı Biçen, Ahmet Nüvit Bingöl, and Orhan
   Kılıç, 87–100. Istanbul: Metis.
Machiavelli, Niccolò. (1532) 2008. The Prince. Translated by James B. Atkinson. India-
   napolis: Hackett Publishing Company.
Meretab, Simon. 2018. “Poland, Hungary, Czech Republic and the Future of the
   Union.” South EU Summit, April 23. https://www.southeusummit.com/europe/
   poland-hungary-czech-republic-future-union/ (accessed July 17, 2019).
Mitsilegas, Valsamis. 2018. “Solidarity beyond the State in Europe’s Common Euro-
   pean System.” In Critical Perspectives on Migration in the Twenty-First Century, edited
   by Marianna Karakoulaki, Laura Southgate, and Jakob Steiner, 196–20. Bristol:
   E-International Relations Publishing.
Morgenthau, Hans J. (1948) 1993. Politics among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace.
   New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Morillas, Pol. 2017. “Setting the Brexit Agenda: Populism and UKIP in the United
   Kingdom.” CIODB Report. https://www.cidob.org/en/articulos/cidob_report/
   n1_1/setting_the_brexit_agenda_populism_and_ukip_in_the_united_kingdom
   (accessed September 20, 2020).
Moses, Lauren. 2016. “The Deficiencies of Dublin: An Analysis of the Dublin System in
   the European Union.” Policy Analysis 6 (2): 6–16.



                                                                 WINTER 2020          341
                                POLICY VERSUS PRAXIS


Nas, Çiğdem. 2016. “Türkiye- AB Vize Serbestliği Diyaloğunun Üyelikle Paralel Hikâyesi
   (The Parallel Story of the EU-Turkey accession and Visa Liberalization Dialogue).”
   In Mülteci Krizi Ekseninde Türkiye-AB İşbirliği: Fırsatlar ve Zorluklar, edited by Ahmet
   Ceran, 31–34. Istanbul: Iktisadi Kalkınma Vakfı Yayınları.
Nielsen, Nikolaj and Eszter Zalan. 2017. “Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary Face
   EU Sanctions on Migrants.” EUobserver, June 13. https://euobserver.com/migra-
   tion/138216 (accessed June 18, 2017).
Palaiologos, Yannis. 2020. “Migration Pact Eyes ‘Mandatory Solidarity’ in EU.” Ekathi-
   merini.com, September 25. https://www.ekathimerini.com/257319/article/ekathi-
   merini/news/migration-pact-eyes-mandatory-solidarity-in-eu (accessed September
   25, 2020).
Refugee Council Briefing. 2002. “The Dublin Convention on Asylum Applications:
   What It Means and How It’s Supposed to Work.” https://www.refugeecouncil.org.
   uk/assets/0001/5851/dublin_aug2002.pdf (accessed June 18, 2017).
Rynning, Sten and Stefano Guzzini. 2002. “Realism and Foreign Policy Analysis.”
   In Politique Etrangere: Nouveaux Regards, edited by Frédéric Charillon, 1–19. Paris:
   Presses Universitaires de France.
Saatçioğlu, Beken. 2016. “Turkey and the EU: Strategic Rapprochement in the Shad-
   ow of the Refugee Crisis.” E-International Relations, January 21. https://www.e-ir.
   info/2016/01/21/turkey-and-the-eu-strategic-rapprochement-in-the-shadow-of-the-
   refugee-crisis/ (accessed September 21, 2020).
Stancova, Katerina. 2009. Integrating EU Migration Policy into the European Neighborhood
   Policy: The Origins, Achievements, and Prospects. Saarbrucken: Verlay Dr. Müller.
Thielemann, Eiko. 2017. “Why Refugee Burden-Sharing Initiatives Fail: Public Goods,
   Free-Riding and Symbolic Solidarity in the EU.” Journal of Common Market Studies 56
   (1): 63–82.
Thucydides. 1972. History of the Peloponnesian War. 431 B.C.E. Translated by Rex Warner.
   London: Penguin Classics.
TRT World. 2020. “European Values at Stake as Refugee Crisis Deepens.” March 6.
   https://www.trtworld.com/europe/european-values-at-stake-as-refugee-crisis-deep-
   ens-34248 (accessed September 20, 2020).
Uçarer, Emek M. 2010. “Justice and Home Affairs.” In European Union Politics, edited
   by Michelle Cini and Nieves Perez-Solorzano Borragan, 306–23. Oxford: Oxford
   University Press.
UNICEF. 2020. “UNICEF Refugee and Migrant Crisis in Europe: Humanitarian
   Situation Report #36 (January—June 2020).” https://reliefweb.int/report/greece/
   unicef-refugee-and-migrant-crisis-europe-humanitarian-situation-report-36-january-
   june (accessed September 20, 2020).
United Nations. 2010. GAOR Convention and Protocol Relating to the Status of Refu-
   gees [1951, 1967]. New York: United Nations.
Yılmaz-Elmas, Fatma. 2016. Avrupa ‘Kapı-Duvar’: Göç Yaklaşımında Söylem Eylem Tutarsızlığı
   (Europe Gets No Answer: Inconsistency between Discourse and Action in Migration
   Approach). Ankara: Uluslararası Stratejik Araştırmalar Kurumu.




342     WO R L D A F FA I R S
Copyright of World Affairs is the property of Sage Publications Inc. and its content may not
be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.
