# Source: gilpin-1987-three-ideologies.pdf
# Converted: 2026-03-06 14:39
# Note: Line numbers here differ from PDF page numbers
---

CHAPTER TWO

Three Ideologies of Political Economy



O tionalism, and century
     VER THE PAST        and a half, the ideologies of liberalism, na-
                 Marxism have divided humanity. This book uses
"ideology" to refer to "systems of thought and belief by which [indi-
viduals and groups] explain ... how their social system operates and
what principles it exemplifies" (Heilbroner, r 98 5, p. 107). The conflict
among these three moral and intellectual positions has revolved around
the role and significance of the market in the organization of society
and economic affairs.
   Through an evaluation of the strengths and weaknesses of these
three ideologies it is possible to illuminate the study of the field of in-
ternational political economy. The strengths of each perspective set
forth here will be applied to subsequent discussions of specific issues,
such as those of trade, investment, and development. Although my val-
ues are those of liberalism, the world in which we live is one best de-
scribed by the ideas of economic nationalism and occasionally by those
of Marxism as well. Eclecticism may not be the route to theoretical pre-
cision, but sometimes it is the only route available.
   The three ideologies differ on a broad range of questions such as:
What is the significance of the market for economic growth and the dis-
tribution of wealth among groups and societies? What ought to be the
role of markets in the organization of domestic and international soci-
ety? What is the effect of the market system on issues of war or peace?
These and similar questions are central to discussions of international
political economy.
   These three ideologies are fundamentally different in their concep-
tions of the relationships among society, state, and market, and it may
not be an exaggeration to say that every controversy in the field of in-
ternational political economy is ultimately reducible to differing con-
ceptions of these relationships. The intellectual clash is not merely of
historical interest. Economic liberalism, Marxism, and economic na-
tionalism are all very much alive at the end of the twentieth century;
they define the conflicting perspectives that individuals have with re-
gard to the implications of the market system for domestic and inter-
national society. Many of the issues that were controversial in the
                                                                         25




                              This content downloaded from
            128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CHAPTER TWO

eighteenth and nineteenth centuries are once again being intensely de-
bated.
   It is important to understand the nature and content of these con-
trasting "ideologies" of political economy. The term "ideology" is used
rather than "theory" because each position entails a total belief system
concerning the nature of human beings and society and is thus akin to
what Thomas Kuhn has called a paradigm (Kuhn, 1962). As Kuhn
demonstrates, intellectual commitments are held tenaciously and can
seldom be dislodged by logic or by contrary evidence. This is due to the
fact that these commitments or ideologies allege to provide scientific
descriptions of how the world does work while they also constitute
normative positions regarding how the world should work.
   Although scholars have produced a number of "theories" to explain
the relationship of economics and politics, these three stand out and
have had a profound influence on scholarship and political affairs. In
highly oversimplified terms, economic nationalism (or, as it was origi-
nally called, mercantilism), which developed from the practice of
statesmen in the early modern period, assumes and advocates the pri-
macy of politics over economics. It is essentially a doctrine of state-
building and asserts that the market should be subordinate to the pur-
suit of state interests. It argues that political factors do, or at least
should, determine economic relations. Liberalism, which emerged
from the Enlightenment in the writings of Adam Smith and others, was
a reaction to mercantilism and has become embodied in orthodox eco-
nomics. It assumes that politics and economics exist, at least ideally, in
separate spheres; it argues that markets-in the interest of efficiency,
growth, and consumer choice-should be free from political interfer-
ence. Marxism, which appeared in the mid-nineteenth century as a re-
action against liberalism and classical economics, holds that economics
drives politics. Political conflict arises from struggle among classes over
the distribution of wealth. Hence, political conflict will cease with the
elimination of the market and of a society of classes. Since both nation-
alism and Marxism in the modern era have developed largely in reac-
tion to the tenets of liberal economics, my discussion and evaluation of
these ideologies will begin with economic liberalism.


THE LIBERAL PERSPECTIVE

Some scholars assert that there is no such thing as a liberal theory of
political economy because liberalism separates economics and politics
from one another and assumes that each sphere operates according to
26




                         This content downloaded from
       128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                          THREE IDEOLOGIES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

particular rules and a logic of its own.' This view is itself, however, an
ideological position and liberal theorists do in fact concern themselves
with both political and economic affairs. Whether it is made explicit in
their writings or is merely implicit, one can speak of a liberal theory of
political economy.
   There is a set of values from which liberal theories of economics and
of politics arise; in the modern world these political and economic val-
ues have tended to appear together (Lindblom, 1977). Liberal eco-
nomic theory is committed to free markets and minimal state interven-
tion, although, as will be pointed out below, the relative emphasis on
one or the other may differ. Liberal political theory is committed to in-
dividual equality and liberty, although again the emphasis may differ.
We are primarily concerned here with the economic component of lib-
eral theory.
   The liberal perspective on political economy is embodied in the dis-
cipline of economics as it has developed in Great Britain, the United
States, and Western Europe. From Adam Smith to its contemporary
proponents, liberal thinkers have shared a coherent set of assumptions
and beliefs about the nature of human beings, society, and economic
activities. Liberalism has assumed many forms-classical, neo-classi-
cal, Keynesian, monetarist, Austrian, rational expectation, etc. These
variants range from those giving priority to equality and tending to-
ward social democracy and state interventionism to achieve this objec-
tive, to those stressing liberty and noninterventionism at the expense of
social equality. All forms of economic liberalism, however, are com-
mitted to the market and the price mechanism as the most efficacious
means for organizing domestic and international economic relations.
Liberalism may, in fact, be defined as a doctrine and set of principles
for organizing and managing a market economy in order to achieve
maximum efficiency, economic growth, and individual welfare.
   Economic liberalism assumes that a market arises spontaneously in
order to satisfy human needs and that, once it is in operation, it func-
tions in accordance with its own internal logic. Human beings are by
nature economic animals, and therefore markets evolve naturally with-
out central direction. As Adam Smith put it, it is inherent in mankind
to "truck, barter and exchange." To facilitate exchange and improve

   ' The term "liberal" is used in this book in its European connotation, that is, a com-
mitment to individualism, free market, and private property. This is the dominant per-
spective of most American economists and of economics as taught in American univer-
sities. Thus, both Paul Samuelson and Milton Friedman, despite important differences
between their political and theoretical views, are regarded here as representatives of the
American liberal tradition.

                                                                                      27




                                This content downloaded from
              128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CHAPTER TWO

their well-being, people create markets, money, and economic institu-
tions. Thus, in his "The Economic Organization of a P.o.W. Camp,"
R. A. Radford (1945) shows how a complex and sophisticated market
arose spontaneously in order to satisfy human wants, but his tale also
demonstrates how a form of government was necessary to police and
maintain this primitive market system. 2.
   The rationale for a market system is that it increases economic effi-
ciency, maximizes economic growth, and thereby improves human
welfare. Although liberals believe that economic activity also enhances
the power and security of the state, they argue that the primary objec-
tive of economic activity is to benefit individual consumers. Their ulti-
mate defense of free trade and open markets is that they increase the
range of goods and services available to the consumer.
   The fundamental premise of liberalism is that the individual con-
sumer, firm, or household is the basis of society. Individuals behave ra-
tionally and attempt to maximize or satisfy certain values at the lowest
possible cost to themselves. Rationality applies only to endeavor, not
to outcome. Thus, failure to achieve an objective due to ignorance or
some other cause does not, according to liberals, invalidate their prem-
ise that individuals act on the basis of a cost/benefit or means/ends cal-
culus. Finally, liberalism argues that an individual will seek to acquire
an objective until a market equilibrium is reached, that is, until the
costs associated with achieving the objective are equal to the benefits.
Liberal economists attempt to explain economic and, in some cases, all
human behavior on the basis of these individualistic and rationalistic
assumptions (Rogowski, 1978).
   Liberalism also assumes that a market exists in which individuals
have complete information and are thus enabled to select the most ben-
eficial course of action. Individual producers and consumers will be
highly responsive to price signals, and this will create a flexible econ-
omy in which any change in relative prices will elicit a corresponding
change in patterns of production, consumption, and economic institu-
tions; the latter are conceived ultimately to be the product rather than
the cause of economic behavior (Davis and North, 1971). Further, in a
truly competitive market, the terms of exchange are determined solely
by considerations of supply and demand rather than by the exercise of
power and coercion. If exchange is voluntary, both parties benefit. In
colloquial terms, a "free exchange is no robbery."
   Economics, or rather the economics taught in most American uni-
versities (what Marxists call orthodox or bourgeois economics), is as-

   ' I would like to thank Michael Doyle for bringing this interesting article to my atten-
tion.




                           This content downloaded from
         128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                          THREE IDEOLOGIES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

sumed to be an empirical science of maximizing behavior. Behavior is
believed to be governed by a set of economic "laws" that are imper-
sonal and politically neutral; therefore, economics and politics should
and can be separated into distinct spheres. Governments should not in-
tervene in the market except where a "market failure" exists (Baumol,
1965) or in order to provide a so-called public or collective good (Ol-
son, 1965).
   A market economy is governed principally by the law of demand
(Becker, 1976, p. 6). This "law" (or, if one prefers, assumption) holds
that people will buy more of a good if the relative price falls and less if
it rises; people will also tend to buy more of a good as their relative in-
come rises and less as it falls. Any development that changes the relative
price of a good or the relative income of an actor will create an incen-
tive or disincentive to acquire (or produce) more or less of the good;
this law in turn has profound ramifications throughout the society. Al-
though certain exceptions to this simple concept exist, it is fundamental
to the operation and success of a market system of economic exchange.
   On the supply side of the economy, liberal economics assumes that
individuals pursue their interests in a world of scarcity and resource
constraints. This is a fundamental and inescapable condition of human
existence. Every decision involves an opportunity cost, a tradeoff
among alternative uses of available resources (Samuelson, I 980, p. 2 7).
The basic lesson of liberal economics is that "there is no such thing as
a free lunch"; to get something one must be willing to give up some-
thing else.
   Liberalism also assumes that a market economy exhibits a powerful
tendency toward equilibrium and inherent stability, at least over the
long term. This "concept of a self-operating and self-correcting equilib-
rium achieved by a balance of forces in a rational universe" is a crucial
one for the economists' belief in the operation of markets and the laws
that are believed to govern them (Condliffe, 1950, p. II2). If a market
is thrown into a state of disequilibrium due to some external (exoge-
nous) factor such as a change in consumer tastes or productive tech-
nology, the operation of the price mechanism will eventually return it
to a new state of equilibrium. Prices and quantities will once again bal-
ance one another. Thus, a change in either the supply or the demand for
a good will elicit corresponding changes in the price of the good. The
principal technique of modern economic analysis, comparative statics,
is based on this assumption of a tendency toward systemic equilib-
rium.3
 ' The method of comparative statics was invented by David Ricardo. It consists of a
model of a market in a state of equilibrium, the introduction of an exogenous variable

                                                                                   29




                                This content downloaded from
              128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CHAPTER TWO

   An additional liberal assumption is that a basic long-term harmony
of interests underlies the market competition of producers and con-
sumers, a harmony that will supercede any temporary conflict of inter-
est. Individual pursuit of self-interest in the market increases social
well-being because it leads to the maximization of efficiency, and the
resulting economic growth eventually benefits all. Consequently,
everyone will gain in accordance with his or her contribution to the
whole, but, it should be added, not everyone will gain equally because
individual productivities differ. Under free exchange, society as a whole
will be more wealthy, but individuals will be rewarded in terms of their
marginal productivity and relative contribution to the overall social
product.
   Finally, most present-day liberal economists believe in progress, de-
fined most frequently as an increase in wealth per capita. They assert
that the growth of a properly functioning economy is linear, gradual,
and continuous (Meier and Baldwin, 1963, p. 70). It proceeds along
what an economist colleague has called "the MIT standard equilibrium
growth curve." Although political or other events-wars, revolution,
or natural disasters-can dramatically disrupt this growth path, the
economy will return eventually to a stable pattern of growth that is de-
termined principally by increases in population, resources, and produc-
tivity. Moreover, liberals see no necessary connection between the
process of economic growth and political developments such as war
and imperialism; these political evils affect and may be affected by eco-
nomic activities, but they are essentially caused by political and not by
economic factors. For example, liberals do not believe that any causal
relationship existed between the advance of capitalism in the late nine-
teenth century and the upheavals of imperialism after r87o and the
outbreak of the First World War. Liberals believe economics is pro-
gressive and politics is retrogressive. Thus they conceive of progress as
divorced from politics and based on the evolution of the market.
   On the basis of these assumptions and commitments, modern econ-
omists have constructed the empirical science of economics. Over the
past two centuries, they have deduced the "laws" of maximizing be-
havior, such as those of the theory of comparative advantage, the the-
ory of marginal utility, and the quantity theory of money. As Arthur
Lewis has commented to me, economists discover new laws at the rate
of about one per quarter century. These "laws" are both contingent and
into the system, and a calculation of the new equilibrium state. Because this mode of
analysis is generally unconcerned with the origins of the exogenous variable itself, it is
limited as a means of examining the problem of economic change.




                           This content downloaded from
         128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                        THREE IDEOLOGIES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

normative. They assume the existence of economic man-a rational,
maximizing creature-a variant of the species homo sapiens that has
been relatively rare in human history and has existed only during pe-
culiar periods of favorable conditions. Further, these laws are norma-
tive in that they prescribe how a society must organize itself and how
people must behave if they are to maximize the growth of wealth. Both
individuals and societies may violate these laws, but they do so at the
cost of productive efficiency. Today, the conditions necessary for the
operation of a market economy exist, and the normative commitment
to the market has spread from its birthplace in Western civilization to
embrace an increasingly large portion of the globe. Despite setbacks,
the modern world has moved in the direction of the market economy
and of increasing global economic interdependence precisely because
markets are more efficient than other forms of economic organization
(Hicks, 1969).
   In essence, liberals believe that trade and economic intercourse are a
source of peaceful relations among nations because the mutual benefits
of trade and expanding interdependence among national economies
will tend to foster cooperative relations. Whereas politics tends to di-
vide, economics tends to unite peoples. A liberal international economy
will have a moderating influence on international politics as it creates
bonds of mutual interests and a commitment to the status quo. How-
ever, it is important to emphasize again that although everyone will, or
at least can, be better off in "absolute" terms under free exchange, the
"relative" gains will differ. It is precisely this issue of relative gains and
the distribution of the wealth generated by the market system that has
given rise to economic nationalism and Marxism as rival doctrines.

THE NATIONALIST PERSPECTIVE

Economic nationalism, like economic liberalism, has undergone sev-
eral metamorphoses over the past several centuries. Its labels have also
changed: mercantilism, statism, protectionism, the German Historical
School, and, recently, New Protectionism. Throughout all these mani-
festations, however, runs a set of themes or attitudes rather than a co-
herent and systematic body of economic or political theory. Its central
idea is that economic activities are and should be subordinate to the
goal of state building and the interests of the state. All nationalists as-
cribe to the primacy of the state, of national security, and of military
power in the organization and functioning of the international system.
Within this general commitment two basic positions can be discerned.
Some nationalists consider the safeguarding of national economic in-




                              This content downloaded from
            128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CHAPTER TWO

terests as the minimum essential to the security and survival of the state.
For lack of a better term, this generally defensive position may be called
"benign" mercantilism. 4 On the other hand, there are those nationalists
who regard the international economy as an arena for imperialist ex-
pansion and national aggrandizement. This aggressive form may be
termed "malevolent" mercantilism. The economic policies of Nazi eco-
nomic minister Hjalmar Schacht toward eastern Europe in the 1930s
were of this type (Hirschman, I 969 ).
   Although economic nationalism should be viewed as a general com-
mitment to state building, the precise objectives pursued and the poli-
cies advocated have differed in different times and in different places.
Yet, as Jacob Viner has cogently argued in an often-quoted passage,
economic nationalist (or what he calls mercantilist) writers share con-
victions concerning the relationship of wealth and power:
I believe that practically all mercantilists, whatever the period, country, or sta-
tus of the particular individual, would have subscribed to all of the following
propositions: (I) wealth is an absolutely essential means to power, whether for
security or for aggression; (2) power is essential or valuable as a means to the
acquisition or retention of wealth; (3) wealth and power are each proper ulti-
mate ends of national policy; (4) there is long-run harmony between these ends,
although in particular circumstances it may be necessary for a time to make
economic sacrifices in the interest of military security and therefore also of
long-run prosperity (Viner, 1958, p. 286).

Whereas liberal writers generally view the pursuit of power and wealth,
that is, the choice between "guns and butter," as involving a tradeoff,
nationalists tend to regard the two goals as being complementary
(Knorr, 1944, p. 10).
   Economic nationalists stress the role of economic factors in interna-
tional relations and view the struggle among states-capitalist, social-
ist, or whatever-for economic resources as pervasive and indeed in-
herent in the nature of the international system itself. As one writer has
put it, since economic resources are necessary for national power, every
conflict is at once both economic and political (Hawtrey, 19 52). States,
at least over the long run, simultaneously pursue wealth and national
power.
   As it evolved in the early modern era, economic nationalism re-
sponded to and reflected the political, economic, and military devel-
opments of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries: the

  4 One can identify Friedrich List with the benign mercantilist position. List believed

that true cosmopolitanism could only be possible when all states had been developed. For
a discussion of benign and malevolent mercantilism, see Gilpin 1975, pp. 234-37 and
Chapter Ten below.




                           This content downloaded from
         128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                        THREE IDEOLOGIES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

emergence of strong national states in constant competition, the rise of
a middle class devoted at first to commerce and increasingly to manu-
facturing, and the quickening pace of economic activities due to
changes within Europe and the discovery of the New World and its re-
sources. The evolution of a monetarized market economy and the wide
range of changes in the nature of warfare that have been characterized
as the "Military Revolution" were also critically important (Roberts,
1956). Nationalists (or "mercantilists," as they were then called) had
good cause to identify a favorable balance of trade with national secu-
rity.
   For several reasons, the foremost objective of nationalists is indus-
trialization (Sen, 1984). In the first place, nationalists believe that in-
dustry has spillover effects (externalities) throughout the economy and
leads to its overall development. Second, they associate the possession
of industry with economic self-sufficiency and political autonomy.
Third, and most important, industry is prized because it is the basis of
military power and central to national security in the modern world. In
almost every society, including liberal ones, governments pursue poli-
cies favorable to industrial development. As the mercantilist theorist of
American economic development, Alexander Hamilton, wrote: "not
only the wealth but the independence and security of a country appear
to be materially connected to the prosperity of manufactures" (quoted
in Rostow, 1971, p. r89); no contemporary dependency theorist has
put it better. This nationalist objective of industrialization, as will be
argued in Chapter Three, is itself a major source of economic conflict.
   Economic nationalism, both in the early modern era and today,
arises in part from the tendency of markets to concentrate wealth and
to establish dependency or power relations between the strong and the
weak economies. In its more benign or defensive form it attempts to
protect the economy against untoward external economic and political
forces. Defensive economic nationalism frequently exists in less devel-
oped economies or in those advanced economies that have begun to de-
cline; such governments pursue protectionist and related policies to
protect their nascent or declining industries and to safeguard domestic
interests. In its more malevolent form, economic nationalism is the con-
duct of economic warfare. This type is most prevalent in expanding
powers. The classic example is Nazi Germany.
   In a world of competing states, the nationalist considers relative gain
to be more important than mutual gain. Thus nations continually try to
change the rules or regimes governing international economic relations
in order to benefit themselves disproportionately with respect to other
economic powers. As Adam Smith shrewdly pointed out, everyone
wants to be a monopolist and will attempt to be one unless prevented
                                                                         33




                              This content downloaded from
            128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CHAPTER TWO

by competitors. Therefore, a liberal international economy cannot de-
velop unless it is supported by the dominant economic states whose
own interests are consistent with its preservation.
   Whereas liberals stress the mutual benefits of international com-
merce, nationalists as well as Marxists regard these relations as basi-
cally conflictual. Although this does not rule out international eco-
nomic cooperation and the pursuit of liberal policies, economic
interdependence is never symmetrical; indeed, it constitutes a source of
continuous conflict and insecurity. Nationalist writers from Alexander
Hamilton to contemporary dependency theorists thus emphasize na-
tional self-sufficiency rather than economic interdependence.
   Economic nationalism has taken several different forms in the mod-
ern world. Responding to the Commercial Revolution and the expan-
sion of international trade throughout the early period, classical or fi-
nancial mercantilism emphasized the promotion of trade and a balance
of payments surplus. Following the Industrial Revolution, industrial
mercantilists like Hamilton and List stressed the supremacy of industry
and manufacturing over agriculture. Following the First and Second
World Wars these earlier concerns have been joined by a powerful com-
mitment to the primacy of domestic welfare and the welfare state. In
the last decades of this century, the increasing importance of advanced
technology, the desire for national control over the "commanding
heights" of the modern economy, and the advent of what might best be
called "policy competitiveness" have become the distinctive features of
contemporary mercantilism. In all ages, however, the desire for power
and independence have been the overriding concern of economic na-
tionalists.
   Whatever its relative strengths and weaknesses as an ideology or the-
ory of international political economy, the nationalist emphasis on the
geographic location and the distribution of economic activities provide
it with powerful appeal. Throughout modern history, states have pur-
sued policies promoting the development of industry, advanced tech-
nology, and those economic activities with the highest profitability and
generation of employment within their own borders. As far as they can,
states try to create an international division of labor favorable to their
political and economic interests. Indeed, economic nationalism is likely
to be a significant influence in international relations as long as the state
system exists.

THE MARXIST PERSPECTIVE

Like liberalism and nationalism, Marxism has evolved in significant
ways since its basic ideas were set forth by Karl Marx and Friedrich En-

34




                          This content downloaded from
        128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                        THREE IDEOLOGIES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

international conflict and political change (Gilpin, I 98 I). However, the
assumptions of the two theories regarding the basis of human motiva-
tion, the theory of the state, and the nature of the international system
are fundamentally different. Marxists regard human nature as mallea-
ble and as easily corrupted by capitalism and correctable by socialism;
realists believe that political conflict results from an unchanging human
nature.
   Whereas Marxists believe that the state is ultimately the servant of
the dominant economic class, realists see the state as a relatively auton-
omous entity pursuing national interests that cannot be reduced to the
particularistic interests of any class. For Marxists, the international sys-
tem and foreign policy are determined by the structure of the domestic
economy; for realists, the nature of the international system is the fun-
damental determinant of foreign policy. In short, Marxists regard war,
imperialism, and the state as evil manifestations of a capitalism that
will disappear with the communist revolution; realists hold them to be
inevitable features of an anarchical international political system.
   The difference between the two perspectives, therefore, is consider-
able. For the Marxist, though the state and the struggles among states
are a consequence of the capitalist mode of production, the future will
bring a realm of true harmony and peace following the inevitable rev-
olution that the evil capitalist mode of production will spawn. The real-
ist, on the other hand, believes there will be no such nirvana because of
the inherently self-centered nature of human beings and the anarchy of
the international system itself. The struggle among groups and states is
virtually ceaseless, although there is occasionally a temporary respite.
It seems unlikely that either prediction will ever receive scientific veri-
fication.
   Each of the three perspectives has strengths and weaknesses, to be
further explored below. Although no perspective provides a complete
and satisfactory understanding of the nature and dynamism of the in-
ternational political economy, together they provide useful insights.
They also raise important issues that will be explored in succeeding
chapters.
Critique of Economic Liberalism
Liberalism embodies a set of analytical tools and policy prescriptions
that enable a society to maximize its return from scarce resources; its
commitment to efficiency and the maximization of total wealth pro-
vides much of its strength. The market constitutes the most effective
means for organizing economic relations, and the price mechanism op-
erates to ensure that mutual gain and hence aggregate social benefit
                                                                         43




                              This content downloaded from
            128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CHAPTER TWO

tend to result from economic exchange. In effect, liberal economics
says to a society, whether domestic or international, "if you wish to be
wealthy, this is what you must do."
   From Adam Smith to the present, liberals have tried to discover the
laws governing the wealth of nations. Although most liberals consider
the laws of economics to be inviolable laws of nature, these laws may
best be viewed as prescriptive guides for decision makers. If the laws are
violated, there will be costs; the pursuit of objectives other than effi-
ciency will necessarily involve an opportunity cost in terms of lost effi-
ciency. Liberalism emphasizes the fact that such tradeoffs always exist
in national policy. An emphasis on equity and redistribution, for ex-
ample, is doomed to failure in the long run if it neglects considerations
of efficiency. For a society to be efficient, as socialist economies have
discovered, it cannot totally disregard the pertinent economic "laws."
   The foremost defense of liberalism is perhaps a negative one. Al-
though it may be true, as Marxists and some nationalists argue, that the
alternative to a liberal system could be one in which all gain equally, it
is also possible that the alternative could be one in which all lose in ab-
solute terms. Much can be said for the liberal harmony of interest doc-
trine; yet, as E. H. Carr has pointed out, evidence to support this doc-
trine has generally been drawn from historical periods in which there
was "unparalleled expansion of production, population and prosper-
ity" (Carr, 1951 [1939], p. 44). When sustaining conditions break
down (as happened in the 1930s and threatens to occur again in the
closing decades of the century), disharmony displaces harmony and, I
shall argue, the consequent breakdown of liberal regimes tends to lead
to economic conflict wherein everyone loses.
   The major criticism leveled against economic liberalism is that its
basic assumptions, such as the existence of rational economic actors, a
competitive market, and the like, are unrealistic. In part, this attack is
unfair in that liberals knowingly make these simplifying assumptions in
order to facilitate scientific research; no science is possible without
them. What is more important, as defenders correctly point out, is that
they should be judged by their results and ability to predict rather than
by their alleged reality (Posner, 1977, ch. I). From this perspective and
within its own sphere, economics has proven to be a powerful analyti-
cal tool.
   By the same token, however, liberal economics can be criticized in
several important respects. As a means to understand society and es-
pecially its dynamics, economics is limited; it cannot serve as a compre-
hensive approach to political economy. Yet liberal economists have
tended to forget this inherent limitation, to regard economics as the
44




                         This content downloaded from
       128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                        THREE IDEOLOGIES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

master social science, and to permit economics w become imperialistic.
When this occurs, the nature and basic assumptions of the discipline
can lead the economist astray and limit its utility as a theory of political
economy.
   The first of these limitations is that economics artificially separates
the economy from other aspects of society and accepts the existing so-
ciopolitical framework as a given, including the distribution of power
and property rights; the resource and other endowments of individuals,
groups, and national societies; and the framework of social, political,
and cultural institutions. The liberal world is viewed as one of homo-
geneous, rational, and equal individuals living in a world free from po-
litical boundaries and social constraints. Its "laws" prescribe a set of
maximizing rules for economic actors regardless of where and with
what they start; yet in real life, one's starting point most frequently de-
termines where one finishes (Dahrendorf, 1979).
    Another limitation of liberal economics as a theory is a tendency to
disregard the justice or equity of the outcome of economic activities.
Despite heroic efforts to fashion an "objective" welfare economics, the
distribution of wealth within and among societies lies outside the pri-
mary concern of liberal economics. There is some truth in the Marxist
criticism that liberal economics is a tool kit for managing a capitalist or
market economy. Bourgeois economics is, in the Marxist view, a disci-
pline of engineering rather than a holistic science of society. It tells one
how to achieve particular objectives at the least cost under a given set
of constraints; it does not purport to answer questions regarding the
future and destiny of man, questions dear to the hearts of Marxists and
economic nationalists.
   Liberalism is also limited by its assumption that exchange is always
free and occurs in a competitive market between equals who possess
full information and are thus enabled to gain mutually if they choose to
exchange one value for another. Unfortunately, as Charles Lindblom
has argued, exchange is seldom free and equal (Lindblom, I 977, pp.
40-50). Instead, the terms of an exchange can be profoundly affected
by coercion, differences in bargaining power (monopoly or monop-
sony), and other essentially political factors. In effect, because it neg-
lects both the effects of noneconomic factors on exchange and the ef-
fects of exchange on politics, liberalism lacks a true "political
economy."
   A further limitation of liberal economics is that its analysis tends to
be static. At least in the short run, the array of consumer demands, the
institutional framework, and the technological environment are ac-
cepted as constants. They are regarded as a set of constraints and op-

                                                                         45




                              This content downloaded from
            128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CHAPTER TWO

portunities within which economic decisions and tradeoffs are made.
Questions about the origins of, or the directions taken by, economic in-
stitutions and the technological apparatus are, for the liberal, a second-
ary matter. Liberal economists are incrementalists who believe that so-
cial structures tend to change slowly in response to price signals.
Although liberal economists have attempted to develop theories of eco-
nomic and technological change, the crucial social, political, and tech-
nological variables affecting change are considered to be exogenous
and beyond the realm of economic analysis. As Marxists charge, liber-
alism lacks a theory of the dynamics of international political economy
and tends to assume the stability and the virtues of the economic status
quo.
   Liberal economics, with its laws for maximizing behavior, is based
on a set of highly restrictive assumptions. No society has ever or could
ever be composed of the true "economic man" of liberal theory. A
functioning society requires affective ties and the subordination of in-
dividual self-interest to larger social values; if this were not the case the
society would fly apart (Polanyi, 1957). Yet Western society has gone
far in harnessing for social and economic betterment a basic tendency
in human beings toward self-aggrandizement (Baechler, 1971).
Through release of the market mechanism from social and political
constraints, Western civilization has reached a level of unprecedented
affluence and has set an example that other civilizations wish to emu-
late. It has done so, however, at the cost of other values. As liberal eco-
nomics teaches, nothing is ever achieved without a cost.
Critique of Economic Nationalism
The foremost strength of economic nationalism is its focus on the state
as the predominant actor in international relations and as an instru-
ment of economic development. Although many have argued that
modern economic and technological developments have made the na-
tion-state an anachronism, at the end of the twentieth century the sys-
tem of nation-states is actually expanding; societies throughout the
world are seeking to create strong states capable of organizing and
managing national economies, and the number of states in the world is
increasing. Even in older states, the spirit of nationalist sentiments can
easily be inflamed, as happened in the Falkland War of 1982. Al-
though other actors such as transnational and international organiza-
tions do exist and do influence international relations, the economic
and military efficiency of the state makes it preeminent over all these
other actors.
   The second strength of nationalism is its stress on the importance of
46




                         This content downloaded from
       128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                        THREE IDEOLOGIES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

security and political interests in the organization and conduct of inter-
national economic relations. One need not accept the nationalist em-
phasis on the primacy of security considerations to appreciate that the
security of the state is a necessary precondition for its economic and po-
litical well-being in an anarchic and competitive state system. A state
that fails to provide for its own security ceases to be independent.
Whatever the objectives of the society, the effects of economic activities
upon political independence and domestic welfare always rank high
among its concerns (Strange, I98 sc, p. 234).
    The third strength of nationalism is its emphasis on the political
framework of economic activities, its recognition that markets must
function in a world of competitive groups and states. The political re-
lations among these political actors affect the operation of markets just
as markets affect the political relations. In fact, the international polit-
ical system constitutes one of the most important constraints on and
determinant of markets. Since states seek to influence markets to their
own individual advantage, the role of power is crucial in the creation
and sustaining of market relations; even Ricardo's classic example of
the exchange of British woolens for Portuguese wine was not free from
the exercise of state power (Choucri, I98o, p. I I I). Indeed, as Carr has
argued, every economic system must rest on a secure political base
(Carr, I95I [I939]).
    One weakness of nationalism is its tendency to believe that interna-
tional economic relations constitute solely and at all times a zero-sum
game, that is, that one state's gain must of necessity be another's loss.
Trade, investment, and all other economic relations are viewed by the
nationalist primarily in conflictual and distributive terms. Yet, if co-
operation occurs, markets can bring mutual (albeit not necessarily
equal) gain, as the liberal insists. The possibility of benefit for all is the
basis of the international market economy. Another weakness of na-
tionalism is due to the fact that the pursuit of power and the pursuit of
wealth usually do conflict, at least in the short run. The amassing and
exercising of military and other forms of power entail costs to the so-
ciety, costs that can undercut its economic efficiency. Thus, as Adam
Smith argued, the mercantilist policies of eighteenth-century states that
identified money with wealth were detrimental to the growth of the real
wealth created by productivity increases; he demonstrated that the
wealth of nations would have been better served by policies of free
trade. Similarly, the tendency today to identify industry with power can
weaken the economy of a state. Development of industries without re-
gard to market considerations or comparative advantage can weaken a
society economically. Although states in a situation of conflict must on
                                                                           47




                               This content downloaded from
             128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CHAPTER TWO

occasion pursue mercantilistic goals and policies, over the long term,
pursuit of these policies can be self-defeating.
   In addition, nationalism lacks a satisfactory theory of domestic so-
ciety, the state, and foreign policy. It tends to assume that society and
state form a unitary entity and that foreign policy is determined by an
objective national interest. Yet, as liberals correctly stress, society is
pluralistic and consists of individuals and groups (coalitions of individ-
uals) that try to capture the apparatus of the state and make it serve
their own political and economic interests. Although states possess
varying degrees of social autonomy and independence in the making of
policy, foreign policy (including foreign economic policy) is in large
measure the outcome of the conflicts among dominant groups within
each society. Trade protectionism and most other nationalist policies
result from attempts by one factor of production or another (capital,
labor, or land) to acquire a monopoly position and thereby to increase
its share of the economic rents. Nationalist policies are most frequently
designed to redistribute income from consumers and society as a whole
to producer interests. 8
   Nationalism can thus be interpreted as either a theory of state build-
ing or a cloak for the interests of particular producer groups that are in
a position to influence national policy. In their failure to appreciate
fully or distinguish between the two possible meanings of economic na-
tionalism, nationalists can be faulted for not applying, both to the do-
mestic level and to the determination of foreign policy, their assump-
tion that the political framework influences economic outcomes. They
fail to take sufficient account of the fact that domestic political groups
frequently use a nationalist rationale, especially that of national secu-
rity, to promote their own interests.
   Whereas in the past, land and capital were the primary carriers of na-
tionalist sentiments, in advanced economies labor has become the most
nationalistic and protectionist of the three factors of production. In a
world of highly mobile capital and resources, labor seeks to use the
state to advance its threatened interests. The increased power of labor
in the contemporary welfare state, as I shall argue below, has become a
major force for economic nationalism.
   The validity of nationalists' emphasis on protectionism and indus-
trialization is more difficult to ascertain. It is true that all great indus-
trial powers have had strong states that protected and promoted their
   8 The literature on the political economy of tariffs and other forms of trade protection-

ism as rent-seeking is extensive. As noted earlier, the subject of economic policy making
falls outside the scope of this book. Frey (r984b) is an excellent discussion of this ap-
proach to tariff policy and related topics.




                           This content downloaded from
         128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                          THREE IDEOLOGIES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

industries in the early stages of industrialization and that without such
protectionism, the "infant" industries of developing economies prob-
ably would not have survived the competition of powerful firms in
more advanced economies. Yet it is also the case that high levels of pro-
tectionism in many countries have led to the establishment of inefficient
industries and even retarded economic development (Kindleberger,
1978b, pp. 19-38). In the final quarter of the twentieth century, econ-
omies like those of Taiwan and South Korea, which have limited pro-
tectionism while favoring competitive export industries, have per-
formed better than those less developed countries that have attempted
to industrialize behind high tariff walls while pursuing a strategy of im-
port substitution.
   The nationalist's bias toward industry over agriculture also must get
a mixed review. It is true that industry can have certain advantages over
agriculture and that the introduction of industrial technology into a so-
ciety has spillover effects that tend to transform and modernize all as-
pects of the economy as it upgrades the quality of the labor force and
increases the profitability of capitaJ.9 Yet one must remember that few
societies have developed without a prior agricultural revolution and a
high level of agricultural productivity (Lewis, 1978a). In fact, certain
of the most prosperous economies of the world, for example, Den-
mark, the American farm belt, and western Canada, are based on effi-
cient agriculture (Viner, r 9 52). In all these societies, moreover, the state
has promoted agricultural development.
   One may conclude that the nationalists are essentially correct in their
belief that the state must play an important role in economic develop-
ment. A strong state is required to promote and, in some cases, to pro-
tect industry as well as to foster an efficient agriculture. Yet this active
role of the state, though a necessary condition, is not a sufficient con-
dition. A strong and interventionist state does not guarantee economic
development; indeed, it might retard it. The sufficient condition for
economic development is an efficient economic organization of agri-
culture and industry, and in most cases this is achieved through the op-
eration of the market. Both of these political and economic conditions
have characterized the developed economies and the rapidly industrial-
izing countries of the contemporary international system.
   It is important to realize that, whatever its relative merits or deficien-
cies, economic nationalism has a persistent appeal. Throughout mod-
ern history, the international location of economic activities has been a
  • Cornwall ( 1977) provides a representative argument of the benefits of industry over
agriculture in economic development.

                                                                                    49




                                This content downloaded from
              128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CHAPTER TWO

leading concern of states. From the seventeenth century on states have
pursued conscious policies of industrial and technological develop-
ment. Both to achieve stable military power and in the belief that in-
dustry provides a higher "value added" (see Chapter Three, note 26)
than agriculture, the modern nation-state has had as one of its major
objectives the establishment and protection of industrial power. As
long as a conflictual international system exists, economic nationalism
will retain its strong attraction.

Critique of Marxist Theory
Marxism correctly places the economic problem-the production and
distribution of material wealth-where it belongs, at or near the center
of political life. Whereas liberals tend to ignore the issue of distribution
and nationalists are concerned primarily with the international distri-
bution of wealth, Marxists focus on both the domestic and the inter-
national effects of a market economy on the distribution of wealth.
They call attention to the ways in which the rules or regimes governing
trade, investment, and other international economic relations affect the
distribution of wealth among groups and states (Cohen, 1977, p. 49). 10
However, it is not necessary to subscribe to the materialist interpreta-
tion of history or the primacy of class struggle in order to appreciate
that the ways in which individuals earn their living and distribute
wealth are a critical determinant of social structure and political behav-
IOr.
   Another contribution of Marxism is its emphasis on the nature and
structure of the division of labor at both the domestic and international
levels. As Marx and Engels correctly pointed out in The German Ide-
ology, every division of labor implies dependence and therefore a polit-
ical relationship (Marx and Engels, 1947 [r 846)). In a market economy
the economic nexus among groups and states becomes of critical im-
portance in determining their welfare and their political relations. The
Marxist analysis, however, is too limited, because economic interde-
pendence is not the only or even the most important set of interstate
relations. The political and strategic relations among political actors
are of equal or greater significance and cannot be reduced to merely
economic considerations, at least not as Marxists define economics.
   The Marxist theory of international political economy is also valua-
ble in its focus on international political change. Whereas neither lib-
eralism nor nationalism has a comprehensive theory of social change,

  '"The volume edited by Krasner (I 982c) contains a wide-ranging discussion of the
concept of international regimes.

50




                          This content downloaded from
        128.6.45.205 on Wed, 11 Jan 2023 20:07:49 UTC
                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
