# Source: ikenberry-2018-end-liberal-order.pdf
# Converted: 2026-03-06 14:39
# Note: Line numbers here differ from PDF page numbers
---

                          The end of liberal international order?




                                                           G. JOHN IKENBERRY


                 For seven decades the world has been dominated by a western liberal order. After
                 the Second World War, the United States and its partners built a multifaceted and
                 sprawling international order, organized around economic openness, multilateral
                 institutions, security cooperation and democratic solidarity. Along the way, the
                 United States became the ‘first citizen’ of this order, providing hegemonic leader-
                 ship—anchoring the alliances, stabilizing the world economy, fostering coopera-
                 tion and championing ‘free world’ values. Western Europe and Japan emerged as
                 key partners, tying their security and economic fortunes to this extended liberal
                 order. After the end of the Cold War, this order spread outwards. Countries in east
                 Asia, eastern Europe and Latin America made democratic transitions and became
                 integrated into the world economy. As the postwar order expanded, so too did its
                 governance institutions. NATO expanded, the WTO was launched and the G20
                 took centre stage. Looking at the world at the end of the twentieth century, one
                 could be excused for thinking that history was moving in a progressive and liberal
                 internationalist direction.
                    Today, this liberal international order is in crisis. For the first time since the
                 1930s, the United States has elected a president who is actively hostile to liberal
                 internationalism. Trade, alliances, international law, multilateralism, environ-
                 ment, torture and human rights—on all these issues, President Trump has made
                 statements that, if acted upon, would effectively bring to an end America’s role as
                 leader of the liberal world order. Simultaneously, Britain’s decision to leave the
                 EU, and a myriad other troubles besetting Europe, appear to mark an end to the
                 long postwar project of building a greater union. The uncertainties of Europe, as
                 the quiet bulwark of the wider liberal international order, have global significance.
                 Meanwhile, liberal democracy itself appears to be in retreat, as varieties of ‘new
                 authoritarianism’ rise to new salience in countries such as Hungary, Poland, the
                 Philippines and Turkey. Across the liberal democratic world, populist, nationalist
                 and xenophobic strands of backlash politics have proliferated.1
                    How deep is this crisis? It might simply be a temporary setback. With new
                 political leadership and renewed economic growth, the liberal order could bounce
                 1
                     On the troubles of western liberal democracy, see Edward Luce, The retreat of western liberalism (New York:
                     Atlantic Monthly Press, 2017); Bill Emmott, The fate of the West: the battle to save the world’s most successful political
                     idea (New York: Public Affairs, 2017).

                 International Affairs 94: 1 (2018) 7–23; doi: 10.1093/ia/iix241
                 © The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The Royal Institute of International Affairs. All rights
                 reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 7                                                                                                                    11/12/2017 16:34
                        G. John Ikenberry
                        back. But most observers think there is something more fundamental going on.
                        Some observers see a crisis of American hegemonic leadership. For 70 years,
                        the liberal international order has been tied to American power—its economy,
                        currency, alliance system, leadership. Perhaps what we are witnessing is a ‘crisis
                        of transition’, whereby the old US-led political foundation of the liberal order
                        will give way to a new configuration of global power, new coalitions of states,
                        new governance institutions. This transition might be leading to some sort of
                        post-American and post-western order that remains relatively open and rules-
                        based.2 Others see a deeper crisis, one of liberal internationalism itself. In this
                        view, there is a long-term shift in the global system away from open trade, multi-
                        lateralism and cooperative security. Global order is giving way to various mixtures
                        of nationalism, protectionism, spheres of influence and regional Great Power
                        projects. In effect, there is no liberal internationalism without American and
                        western hegemony—and that age is ending. Liberal internationalism is essentially
                        an artefact of the rapidly receding Anglo-American era.3 Finally, some go even
                        further than this, arguing that what is happening is that the long era of ‘liberal
                        modernity’ is ending. Beginning with the Enlightenment and running through
                        the industrial revolution and the rise of the West, world-historical change seemed
                        to be unfolding according to a deep developmental logic. It was a progressive
                        movement driven by reason, science, discovery, innovation, technology, learning,
                        constitutionalism and institutional adaptation. The world as a whole was in the
                        embrace of this global modernizing movement. Perhaps today’s crisis marks the
                        ending of the global trajectory of liberal modernity. It was an artefact of a specific
                        time and place—and the world is now moving on.4
                           No one can be sure how deep the crisis of liberal internationalism runs. In
                        what follows, I argue that, despite its troubles, liberal internationalism still has a
                        future. The American hegemonic organization of liberal order is weakening, but
                        the more general organizing ideas and impulses of liberal internationalism run
                        deep in world politics. What liberal internationalism offers is a vision of open and
                        loosely rules-based order. It is a tradition of order-building that emerged with the
                        rise and spread of liberal democracy, and its ideas and agendas have been shaped as
                        these countries have confronted and struggled with the grand forces of modernity.
                        Creating an international ‘space’ for liberal democracy, reconciling the dilemmas
                        of sovereignty and interdependence, seeking protections and preserving rights
                        within and between states—these are the underlying aims that have propelled
                        liberal internationalism through the ‘golden eras’ and ‘global catastrophes’ of the
                        last two centuries. Despite the upheavals and destruction of world war, economic
                        depression, and the rise and fall of fascism and totalitarianism, the liberal interna-
                        2
                            See G. John Ikenberry, Liberal Leviathan: the origins, crisis, and transformation of the American world order ­(Princeton:
                            Princeton University Press, 2011); Amitav Acharya, The end of American world order (Cambridge: Polity, 2014).
                        3
                            See Robert Kagan, The world America made (New York: Vintage, 2013). For recent views, see Ian Buruma, ‘The
                            end of the Anglo-American order’, New York Times Magazine, 29 Nov. 2016; Ulrich Speck, ‘The crisis of liberal
                            order’, The American Interest, 12 Sept. 2016; Michael J. Boyle, ‘The coming illiberal era’, Survival 58: 2, 2016,
                            pp. 35–66.
                        4
                            On the crisis of liberal modernity, see Pankaj Mishra, Age of anger: a history of the present (New York: Farrar,
                            Straus & Giroux, 2017).
                        8
                        International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 8                                                                                                                         11/12/2017 16:34
                 The end of liberal international order?
                 tional project survived. It is likely to survive today’s crises as well. But to do so this
                 time, as it has done in the past, liberal internationalism will need to be rethought
                 and reinvented.
                     I make this argument in three steps. First, I offer a way of thinking about
                 liberal internationalism. It is not simply a creature of American hegemony. It is
                 a more general and longstanding set of ideas, principles and political agendas for
                 organizing and reforming international order. In the most general sense, liberal
                 internationalism is a way of thinking about and responding to modernity—its
                 opportunities and its dangers. What has united the ideas and agendas of liberal
                 internationalism is a vision of an open, loosely rules-based and progressively
                 oriented international order. Built on Enlightenment foundations, it emerged in
                 the nineteenth century with the rise in the West of liberalism, nationalism, the
                 industrial revolution, and the eras of British and American hegemony. A convic-
                 tion has run through nineteenth- and twentieth-century liberal internationalists
                 that the western and—by extension—the global international order is capable of
                 reform. This separates liberal internationalism from various alternative ideologies
                 of global order—political realism, authoritarian nationalism, Social Darwinism,
                 revolutionary socialism and post-colonialism.
                     Second, I trace liberal internationalism’s crooked pathway into the twenty-
                 first century, as it evolved and reinvented itself along the way. In the nineteenth
                 century, liberal internationalism was seen in the movements towards free trade,
                 international law, collective security and the functional organization of the
                 western capitalist system. Along the way, liberal internationalism mixed and
                 intermingled with all the other major forces that have shaped the modern global
                 system—imperialism, nationalism, capitalism, and the shifting movements of
                 culture and civilization. In the twentieth century and into the twenty-first, it
                 moved through a sequence of golden eras, crises and turning points: Wilson and
                 the League of Nations; the post-Second World War Anglo-American settlement
                 and the building of the US-led postwar order; crises of capitalism and leadership
                 in the world economy; the post-Cold War American ‘unipolar’ moment and the
                 ‘globalization’ of liberalism and neo-liberal ideas; debates about the Responsibility
                 to Protect (R2P) and liberal interventionism; and today’s crisis of the western
                 liberal order. Liberal internationalism came into its own as a political order during
                 the Cold War, under American auspices. American liberal hegemony was essen-
                 tially a western order built around ‘free world’ social purposes.
                     Third, I identify the sources of the contemporary crisis of liberal internation-
                 alism. These can be traced to the end of the Cold War. It is important to recall that
                 the postwar liberal order was originally not a global order. It was built ‘inside’ one
                 half of the bipolar Cold War system. It was part of a larger geopolitical project
                 of waging a global Cold War. It was built around bargains, institutions and social
                 purposes that were tied to the West, American leadership and the global struggle
                 against Soviet communism. When the Cold War ended, this ‘inside’ order became
                 the ‘outside’ order. As the Soviet Union collapsed, the great rival of liberal interna-
                 tionalism fell away, and the American-led liberal order expanded outwards. With

                                                                                                         9
                 International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 9                                                                              11/12/2017 16:34
                        G. John Ikenberry
                        the end of the Cold War, liberal internationalism was globalized. Initially, this was
                        seen as a moment of triumph for western liberal democracies. But the globaliza-
                        tion of the liberal order put in motion two shifts that later became the sources
                        of crisis. First, it upended the political foundations of the liberal order. With
                        new states entering the system, the old bargains and institutions that provided
                        the sources of stability and governance were overrun. A wider array of states—
                        with a more diverse set of ideologies and agendas—were now part of the order.
                        This triggered what might be called a ‘crisis of authority’, where new bargains,
                        roles and responsibilities were now required. These struggles over authority and
                        governance continue today. Second, the globalization of the liberal order also
                        led to a loss of capacity to function as a security community. This can be called
                        a ‘crisis of social purpose’. In its Cold War configuration, the liberal order was a
                        sort of full-service security community, reinforcing the capacity of western liberal
                        democracies to pursue policies of economic and social advancement and stability.
                        As liberal internationalism became the platform for the wider global order, this
                        sense of shared social purpose and security community eroded.
                           Taking all these elements together, this account of the crisis can be under-
                        stood as a crisis of success, in the sense that the troubles besetting the liberal order
                        emerged from its post-Cold War triumph and expansion. Put differently, the
                        troubles today might be seen as a ‘Polanyi crisis’—growing turmoil and insta-
                        bility resulting from the rapid mobilization and spread of global capitalism,
                        market society and complex interdependence, all of which has overrun the polit-
                        ical foundations that supported its birth and early development.5 They do not,
                        on the contrary, constitute what might be called an ‘E. H. Carr crisis’, wherein
                        liberal internationalism fails because of the return of Great Power politics and the
                        problems of anarchy.6 The troubles facing liberal internationalism are not driven
                        by a return of geopolitical conflict, although conflicts with China and Russia are
                        real and dangerous. In fact, the liberal international order has succeeded all too
                        well. It has helped usher in a world that has outgrown its political moorings.
                           Liberal internationalism has survived its 200-year journey into the current
                        century because, with liberal democracy at the core, it offered a coherent and
                        functional vision of how to organize international space. The industrial revolu-
                        tion and the relentless rise of economic and security interdependence generated
                        both opportunities and threats for liberal democracies. Liberal internationalism,
                        in all its varied configurations, has provided templates for cooperation in the face
                        of the grand forces of modernity. To do so again, the liberal international project
                        will need to rethink its vision. It will either need to offer a ‘small and thick’ vision
                        of liberal order, centred as it was during the Cold War on the western liberal
                        democracies; or it will need to offer a ‘large and thin’ version of liberal inter-
                        nationalism, with global principles and institutions for coping with the dangers
                        and vulnerabilities of twenty-first-century modernity—cascading problems of

                        5
                            Karl Polanyi, The great transformation: the political and economic origins of our times (Boston: Beacon, 1957).
                        6
                            E. H. Carr, The twenty years crisis, 1919–1939: an introduction to the study of international relations (London: Macmil-
                            lan, 1951).
                        10
                        International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 10                                                                                                                      11/12/2017 16:34
                 The end of liberal international order?
                 environmental destruction, weapons of mass destruction, global health pandemics
                 and all the other threats to human civilization.

                 Liberal internationalism and world order
                 When the nineteenth century began, liberal democracy was a new and fragile
                 political experiment, a political glimmering within a wider world of monarchy,
                 autocracy, empire and traditionalism. Two hundred years later, at the end of
                 the twentieth century, liberal democracies, led by the western Great Powers,
                 dominated the world—commanding 80 per cent of global GNP. Across these two
                 centuries, the industrial revolution unfolded, capitalism expanded its frontiers,
                 Europeans built far-flung empires, the modern nation-state took root, and along
                 the way the world witnessed what might be called the ‘liberal ascendancy’—the
                 rise in the size, number, power and wealth of liberal democracies.7 Liberal inter-
                 nationalism is the body of ideas and agendas with which these liberal democracies
                 have attempted to organize the world.
                    Liberal internationalism has risen and fallen and evolved. But its general logic
                 is captured in a cluster of five convictions. One concerns openness. Trade and
                 exchange are understood to be constituents of modern society, and the connec-
                 tions and gains that flow from deep engagement and integration foster peace and
                 political advancement. An open international order facilitates economic growth,
                 encourages the flow of knowledge and technology, and draws states together.
                 Second, there is a commitment to some sort of loosely rules-based set of relations.
                 Rule and institutions facilitate cooperation and create capacities for states to make
                 good on their domestic obligations. This is what John Ruggie describes as ‘multi-
                 lateralism’—an institutional form that coordinates relations among a group of
                 states ‘on the basis of generalized principles of conduct’.8 Third, there is a view
                 that liberal international order will entail some form of security cooperation.
                 This does not necessarily mean alliances or a formal system of collective security,
                 but states within the order affiliate in ways designed to increase their security.
                 Fourth, liberal internationalism is built on the idea that international society is,
                 as Woodrow Wilson argued, ‘corrigible’. Reform is possible. Power politics can
                 be tamed—at least to some extent—and states can build stable relations around
                 the pursuit of mutual gains. Fifth and finally, there is an expectation that a liberal
                 international order will move states in a progressive direction, defined in terms of
                 liberal democracy. The order provides institutions, relationships, and rights and
                 protections that allow states to grow and advance at home. It is a sort of mutual
                 aid and protection society.9
                    Seen in this way, a liberal international order can take various forms. It can

                 7
                     See Michael Doyle, ‘Kant, liberal legacies, and foreign affairs’, parts 1 and 2, Philosophy and Public Affairs 12:
                     1–2, 1983, pp. 205–35, 323–53.
                 8
                     John Gerard Ruggie, ‘Multilateralism: the anatomy of an institution’, in John Gerard Ruggie, ed., Multilateral-
                     ism matters: the theory and praxis of an institutional form (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993), p. 11.
                 9
                     See Tim Dunne and Matt McDonald, ‘The politics of liberal internationalism’, International Politics 50: 1, Jan.
                     2013, pp. 1–17; Beate Jahn, Liberal internationalism: theory, history, practice (New York: Palgrave, 2013).
                                                                                                                                    11
                 International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 11                                                                                                         11/12/2017 16:34
                        G. John Ikenberry
                        be more or less global or regional in scope. The early postwar western liberal
                        order was primarily an Atlantic regional community, while the post-Cold War
                        liberal system has had a wider global reach. A liberal international order can be
                        more or less organized around a hegemonic state—that is, it can be more or less
                        hierarchical in character. It can be more or less embodied in formal agreements
                        and governance institutions. Perhaps most importantly, the ‘social purposes’ of a
                        liberal international order can vary. It can have a ‘thin’ social purpose, providing,
                        for example, only rudimentary rules and institutions for limited cooperation and
                        exchange among liberal democracies. Or it could have a ‘thick’ social purpose,
                        with a dense set of agreements and shared commitments aimed at realizing more
                        ambitious goals of cooperation, integration and shared security. Overall, liberal
                        internationalism can be more or less open, rules-based and progressively ­oriented.10
                        Liberal internationalism can be seen as breaking down or disappearing when inter-
                        national order is increasingly organized around mercantile blocs, spheres of influ-
                        ence, imperial zones and closed regions.
                           Taken as a whole, liberal internationalism offers a vision of order in which
                        sovereign states—led by liberal democracies—cooperate for mutual gain and
                        protection within a loosely rules-based global space. Glimmerings of this vision
                        emerged in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, triggered by
                        Enlightenment thinking and the emergence of industrialism and modern society.
                        Over the next century, a variety of economic, political and intellectual develop-
                        ments set the stage for the reorganization of relations among western states. The
                        Great Powers of Europe met as the patrons of western order in the Congress of
                        Vienna. Led by Britain, these states entered into a period of industrial growth and
                        expanding trade. Political reform—and the revolutions of 1848—reflected the rise
                        of and struggles for liberal democracy and constitutionalism, the growth of the
                        middle and working classes, and the creation of new political parties arrayed across
                        the ideological spectrum from conservative to liberal and socialist. Nationalism
                        emerged and became tied to the building of modern bureaucratic states. Britain
                        signalled a new orientation towards the world economy with the repeal of the
                        Corn Laws. Nationalism was matched with new forms of internationalism—in
                        law, commerce and social justice. Peace movements spread across the western
                        world. A new era of European industrial-age imperialism began, as Britain, France
                        and other European states competed for colonial prizes. Along the way, new ideas
                        of ‘the global’ emerged, intellectual and political visions of a rapidly developing
                        global system.11
                        10
                           For a discussion of these various dimensions of liberal internationalism, see G. John Ikenberry, ‘Liberal inter-
                           nationalism 3.0: America and the dilemmas of liberal world order’, Perspectives on Politics 7: 1, March 2009, pp.
                           71–87.
                        11
                           For depictions of the theory and history of liberal internationalism, see Tony Smith, America’s mission: the
                           United States and the worldwide struggle for democracy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994); Michael
                           Mandelbaum, The ideas that conquered the world: peace, democracy, and free markets in the twenty-first century (New
                           York: Public Affairs, 2004); Elizabeth Borgwardt, A new deal for the world: America’s vision for human rights
                           (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2005); Frank Ninkovich, Modernity and power: a history of the
                           domino in the twentieth century (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994). For a portrait of liberalism within
                           the wider array of classical theories of international relations, see Michael Doyle, Ways of war and peace: realism,
                           liberalism, and socialism (New York: Norton, 1997).
                        12
                        International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 12                                                                                                                 11/12/2017 16:34
                 The end of liberal international order?
                    In this setting, liberal internationalism emerged as a way of thinking about
                 western and world order. It began as a variety of scattered nineteenth-century
                 internationalist ideas and movements. Liberal ideas in Britain began with Adam
                 Smith’s writings in the late eighteenth century and continued with thinkers such
                 as Richard Cobden and John Bright in the nineteenth. A general view emerged—
                 captured, for example, in the writings of Walter Bagehot and many others—
                 that there was a developmental logic to history, a movement from despotic states
                 to more rules-based and constitutional ones. Kant’s ideas on republicanism and
                 perpetual peace offered hints of an evolutionary logic in which liberal democra-
                 cies would emerge and organize themselves within a wider political space. Ideas
                 of contracts, rights and the law were developed by thinkers from John Locke to
                 John Stuart Mill.12
                    The connections between domestic liberalism and liberal internationalism are
                 multifaceted, and they have evolved over the last two centuries. It is hard to see a
                 distinctive or coherent liberal international agenda in the nineteenth century. At
                 this time, such notions were primarily manifest in ideas about world politics that
                 emerged from thinkers and activists committed to liberalism within countries—in
                 ideas about liberalization of trade, collective security, arbitration of disputes and
                 so forth. What emerges during this era is a sense of an international sphere of
                 action that was opening up within the liberal democratic world, and a convic-
                 tion that collective efforts could and should be made to manage this expanding
                 international space. As Mark Mazower has argued, what was new was the notion
                 that a realm of ‘the international’ was growing and that ‘it was in some sense
                 governable’.13
                    In the twentieth century there emerged a much more full-blown sense of
                 liberal internationalism, understood as a set of prescriptions for organizing and
                 reforming the world in such a way as to facilitate the pursuit of liberal democ-
                 racy at home. Beginning with Woodrow Wilson in 1919, liberal internationalism
                 emerged as an agenda for building a type of order—a sort of ‘container’ within
                 which liberal democracies could live and survive. In the hands of F. D. Roosevelt
                 and his generation after 1945, liberal internationalism became to an even greater
                 extent an agenda for building an international community within which liberal
                 democracies could be stabilized and protected. Growing out of the New Deal
                 experience, the postwar ‘embedded liberal’ order was designed in part to safeguard
                 liberal democracies from growing risks of economic and political upheavals gener-
                 ated by modernity itself. In this way, liberal internationalism offered a vision of
                 a reformed and managed western—and, eventually, global—order that would
                 provide the organizational principles, institutions and capacities to negotiate the
                 international contingencies and dislocations that threaten the domestic pursuit of
                 liberal democracy.



                 12
                      See Edmund Fawcett, Liberalism: the life of an idea (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2014).
                 13
                      Mark Mazower, Governing the world: the history of an idea (London: Allen Lane, 2012), p. 15.
                                                                                                                           13
                 International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 13                                                                                               11/12/2017 16:34
                        G. John Ikenberry

                        The era of American liberal hegemony
                        Liberal internationalism emerged after the Second World War as an organizing
                        vision for the western-led order. As in 1919, so after 1945 the United States used
                        its postwar position to lead in the building of a postwar order. But along the way,
                        liberal internationalism took on a new shape and character—and with the rise of
                        the Cold War, a US-led liberal hegemonic order emerged. In the age of Wilson,
                        liberal internationalism was a relatively simply vision. International order was to
                        be organized around a collective security system in which sovereign states would
                        act together to uphold a system of territorial peace. The Wilsonian vision was
                        undergirded by open trade, national self-determination, and the expectation of
                        the continuing spread of liberal democracy. As Wilson himself put it: ‘What we
                        seek is the reign of law, based on the consent of the governed and sustained by the
                        organized opinion of mankind.’14 It was an ambitious scheme of order, but one
                        without a lot of institutional machinery for global economic and social problem-
                        solving or the management of Great Power relations. It was to be an institution-
                        ally ‘thin’ system of order in which states—primarily the western powers—would
                        act cooperatively through a shared embrace of liberal ideas and principles.15 The
                        great centrepiece and organizational embodiment of Wilsonian liberal interna-
                        tionalism was the League of Nations.
                            The dramatic upheavals of the Great Depression, the Second World War and
                        the Cold War set the stage for another American-led attempt to build a liberal
                        order. A new moment to remake the world had arrived. Basic questions about
                        power, order and modernity had to be rethought. From the 1930s onwards, the
                        viability of western liberal democracy was itself uncertain. The violence and
                        instabilities of the 1930s and 1940s forced liberal internationalists—and indeed
                        everyone else—to reassess their ideas and agendas. The First World War was a jolt
                        to the optimistic narratives of western civilization and progress. But FDR and his
                        generation—facing the even more frightening rise of fascism and totalitarianism,
                        followed by the horrors of total war, the Holocaust and the advent of atomic
                        weapons, not to mention the collapse of the world economy—seemed to face a
                        far more formidable, even existential array of threats. Modernity itself showed
                        its dark side.
                            In this setting, FDR and his contemporaries found themselves advancing a
                        new—more world-weary—vision of liberal international order. Paradoxically, it
                        became both more universalistic in its vision and more deeply tied to American
                        hegemonic power. The universalism can be seen in the Charter of the United
                        Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In the 1940s, liberal
                        internationalism was reframed. The liberal internationalism of the Woodrow
                        Wilson era was built around civilizational, racial and cultural hierarchies. It was
                        a creature of the western white man’s world. It was a narrow type of principled
                        internationalism. Wilson-era liberal internationalism did not challenge European
                        14
                           Woodrow Wilson, speech at Mount Vernon, Virginia, 4 July 1918, https://archive.org/details/address
                           ofpreside00wilsonw.
                        15
                           See Ikenberry, ‘Liberal internationalism 3.0’.
                        14
                        International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 14                                                                                               11/12/2017 16:34
                 The end of liberal international order?
                 imperialism or racial hierarchies. British liberals explicitly defended empire and
                 continued to see the world in racial and civilizational terms. The 1940s saw a shift
                 or reformulation of these ideas. Universal rights and protections became more
                 central to the ideological vision. FDR’s Four Freedoms (of speech and worship,
                 from want and fear) were the defining vision for this new conception of liberal
                 international order. The postwar order was to be a security community—a global
                 space where liberal democracies joined together to build a cooperative order that
                 enshrined basic human rights and social ­protections.
                    At the same time, these universal rights and protections were advanced and
                 legitimated in terms of the American-led Cold War struggle. The United States
                 would be the hegemonic sponsor and protector of the liberal order. With American
                 leadership, the ‘free world’ would be a sort of ‘security community’. It would
                 have rules, institutions, bargains and full-service political functions. To join the
                 western liberal order was to join a ‘mutual protection’ society. To be inside this
                 order was to enjoy trade, expanding growth, and tools for managing economic
                 stability. Inside, it was warm; outside, it was cold. Countries would be protected
                 in alliance partnerships and an array of functional organizations. In other words,
                 in the postwar era, liberal internationalism became both more universal in its ideas
                 and principles and more tied to an American-led political order.16
                    Over the Cold War decades, American-led liberal internationalism emerged as a
                 distinctive type of order. The United States came to take on a variety of functions
                 and responsibilities. It came to have a direct role in running the order—and it also
                 found itself increasingly tied to the other states within the order. The United States
                 became a provider of public goods—or at least ‘club goods’. It upheld the rules
                 and institutions, fostered security cooperation, led the management of the world
                 economy, and championed shared norms and cooperation among the western-
                 oriented liberal democracies. In security affairs, the United States established an
                 array of security partnerships, beginning with NATO and alliances in east Asia. In
                 the management of the world economy, the Bretton Woods international finan-
                 cial institutions became tied to the American market and dollar. Together, in the
                 shadow of the Cold War, the American domestic system—its market and polity—
                 became ‘fused’ to the evolving and deepening postwar liberal order.
                    American liberal hegemony, as a type of international order, had several key
                 characteristics. First, it was built around open multilateral trade. In many ways,
                 this was the key vision of the postwar American architects of liberal order. During
                 the war, the question was debated: how large a geopolitical market space would
                 the United States need so as to remain a viable global power? This was the era
                 when most of the world’s regions were divided into imperial zones, blocs and
                 spheres of influence. The American strategic judgement was that, on the contrary,
                 the postwar world would need to be open and accessible to the United States.
                 The worst outcome would be closed regions in Europe, Asia and the Middle
                 East, dominated by hostile Great Powers. Out of these worries, the United
                 States launched its efforts to open the world economy and build institutions and
                 16
                      For a depiction of the American liberal hegemonic order, see Ikenberry, Liberal Leviathan.
                                                                                                                   15
                 International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 15                                                                                       11/12/2017 16:34
                        G. John Ikenberry
                        ­partnerships that would establish a durably open global order. At the core of this
                         system would be the liberal democracies, facilitating trade through GATT and
                         later the WTO.
                             Second, American liberal hegemony was also defined by its commitment to a
                         ‘managed’ open world economy. This is what John Ruggie has called ‘embedded
                         liberalism’. International agreements, embodied in the Bretton Woods system, were
                         designed to give governments greater ability to regulate and manage economic
                         openness to ensure that it was reconciled with domestic economic stability and
                         policies in pursuit of full employment.17 The New Deal itself provided an inspira-
                         tion for this new thinking about the organization of an open world economy. The
                         visionary goal was a middle ground between openness and stability. Free trade
                         was essential for the sort of economic recovery and growth that would support
                         centrist and progressive postwar political leadership in the United States and
                         Europe. But trade and exchange would need to be reconciled with government
                         efforts to ensure economic stability and the security of workers and the middle
                         class. Social and economic security went hand in hand with national security.
                             Third, the postwar liberal order was built around new and permanent inter-
                         national institutions. To a greater extent than in Wilson’s day, post-1945 liberal
                         internationalists sought to build order around a system of multilateral gover-
                         nance. This was a vision of intergovernmentalism more than supranationalism.
                         Governments would remain the primary source of authority. But governments
                         would organize their relations around permanent regional and global institutions.
                         They would conduct relations on multilateral platforms—bargaining, consulting,
                         coordinating. These institutions would serve multiple purposes. They would
                         facilitate cooperation by providing venues for ongoing bargaining and exchange.
                         They would reinforce norms of equality and non-discrimination, thereby giving
                         the order more legitimacy. And they would tie the United States more closely to
                         its postwar partners, reducing worries about domination and abandonment. The
                         result was an unprecedented effort across economic, political and security policy
                         spheres to build working multilateral institutions.
                             Fourth, there was a special emphasis on relations among the western liberal
                         democracies. The core underlying principles and norms of the liberal order could
                         be construed as ‘universal’. FDR’s Four Freedoms were of this sort, and so too
                         were the principles of multilateralism embedded in the postwar economic institu-
                         tions. But the order itself was organized around the United States and its liberal
                         democratic allies and clients. The fact that it was built inside the larger Cold
                         War-era bipolar system reinforced this orientation. Architects of the order under-
                         stood that there was a special relationship among the western liberal democracies.
                         At first this encompassed essentially just western Europe and Japan; but in the
                         aftermath of the Cold War a larger and more diverse community of democracies
                         took hold. The essential premise of American global leadership was that there is
                         something special and enduring about the alignment of democracies. They have
                        17
                             John Ruggie, ‘International regimes, transactions, and change: embedded liberalism in the postwar economic
                             order’, International Organization 36: 2, Spring 1982, pp. 379–415.
                        16
                        International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 16                                                                                                         11/12/2017 16:34
                 The end of liberal international order?
                 shared interests and values. American presidents from Woodrow Wilson to Barack
                 Obama have acted on the assumption that democracies have a unique capacity to
                 cooperate. In building liberal order during the Cold War, there was an authentic
                 belief—held in Washington but also in European and Asian capitals—that the
                 ‘free world’ was not just a temporary defensive alliance ranged against the Soviet
                 Union: it was a nascent political community—a community of shared fate.18 In
                 this sense, the American-led order was, at its core, a ‘democratic alliance’ to defend
                 and support a shared liberal democratic political space.
                    This liberal hegemonic order flourished over the decades of the Cold War.
                 It provided a framework for the liberalization of trade and decades of growth
                 across the advanced industrial world. Incomes and life opportunities steadily
                 increased for the postwar generations of Europeans, Japanese and Americans. This
                 open system ushered in, as Paul Johnson argues, ‘the most rapid and prolonged
                 economic expansion in world history’.19 But the postwar liberal order was more
                 than a growth machine. It provided a ‘container’ within which liberal democracies
                 could gain greater measures of security and protection as well. To be inside this
                 liberal hegemonic order was to be positioned inside a set of full-service economic,
                 political and security institutions. It was both a Gesellschaft—a ‘society’ defined by
                 formal rules, institutions and governmental ties—and a Gemeinschaft—a ‘commu-
                 nity’ defined by shared values, beliefs and expectations.20 Liberal order was a sort
                 of nascent security community—with ‘security’ defined broadly.

                 Crises and transformations
                 The foundations of this postwar liberal hegemonic order are weakening. In a simple
                 sense, this is a story of grand shifts in the distribution of power and the conse-
                 quences that follow. The United States and its allies are less powerful than they
                 were when they built the postwar order. The unipolar moment—when the United
                 States dominated world economic and military rankings—is ending. Europe and
                 Japan have also weakened. Together, this old triad of patrons of the postwar liberal
                 order is slowly dwindling in its share of the wider global distribution of power.
                 This shift is probably not best seen as a transition from an American to a Chinese
                 hegemonic order, the ‘return to multipolarity’ or a ‘rise of the non-West’. Rather,
                 it is simply a gradual diffusion of power away from the West. China will probably
                 not replace the United States as an illiberal hegemon, and the global South will
                 probably not emerge as a geopolitical bloc that directly challenges the US-led
                 order. But the United States—and its old allies—will continue to be a smaller part
                 of the global whole, and this will constrain their ability to support and defend the
                 liberal international order.

                 18
                    Timothy Garton Ash, Free world: America, Europe, and the surprising future of the West (New York: Random
                    House, 2004).
                 19
                    Quoted in Paul Ninkovich, The global republic: America's inadvertent rise to world power (Chicago: University of
                    Chicago Press, 2014), p. 178.
                 20
                    These terms were introduced in the early twentieth century by the German sociologists Ferdinand Tonnies
                    and Max Weber.
                                                                                                                                17
                 International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 17                                                                                                      11/12/2017 16:34
                        G. John Ikenberry
                            The political troubles of western liberal democracies magnify the implications
                        of these global power shifts. As noted above, democracies everywhere are facing
                        internal difficulties and discontents. The older western democracies are experi-
                        encing rising inequality, economic stagnation, fiscal crisis, and political polariza-
                        tion and gridlock. Many newer and poorer democracies, meanwhile, are beset by
                        corruption, backsliding and rising inequality. The great ‘third wave’ of democrati-
                        zation seems to have crested, and now to be receding. As democracies fail to address
                        problems, their domestic legitimacy is diminished and increasingly challenged by
                        resurgent nationalist, populist and xenophobic movements. Together, these devel-
                        opments cast a dark shadow over the democratic future.
                            During the Cold War, the American-led liberal order was lodged within the
                        western side of the bipolar world system. It was during these decades that the
                        foundations of liberal hegemonic order were laid. With the collapse of the Soviet
                        Union, this ‘inside’ order became the nucleus of an expanding global system. This
                        had several consequences. One was that the United States became the sole super-
                        power—the world entered the unipolar moment. This made American power
                        itself an issue in world politics. During the Cold War, American power had a
                        functional role in the system: it served as a balance against Soviet power. With
                        the sudden emergence of unipolarity, American power was less constrained—and
                        it did not play the same system-functional role. New debates emerged about the
                        character of American hegemonic power. What would restrain American power?
                        Was the United States now an informal empire? The American war in Iraq and
                        the global ‘war on terror’ exacerbated these worries.21
                            Ironically, the crisis of the US-led liberal order can be traced to the collapse of
                        Cold War bipolarity and the resulting spread of liberal internationalism. The seeds
                        of crisis were planted at this moment of triumph. The liberal international order
                        was, in effect, globalized. It was freed from its Cold War foundations and rapidly
                        became the platform for an expanding global system of liberal democracy, markets
                        and complex interdependence. During the Cold War, the liberal order was a global
                        subsystem—and the bipolar global system served to reinforce the roles, commit-
                        ments, identity and community that were together manifest as liberal hegemony.
                        The crisis of liberal internationalism can be seen as a slow-motion reaction to this
                        deep transformation in the geopolitical setting of the postwar liberal international
                        project. Specifically, the globalization of liberal internationalism put in motion
                        two long-term effects: a crisis of governance and authority, and a crisis of social
                        purpose.
                            First, with the collapse of the Soviet sphere, the American-led liberal inter-
                        national order became the only surviving framework for order, and a growing
                        number and diversity of states began to be integrated into it. This created new
                        problems for the governance of the order. During the Cold War, the western-
                        oriented liberal order was led by the United States, Europe and Japan, and it was
                        21
                             See Ikenberry, Liberal Leviathan, ch. 6. For debates about American unipolarity, see Steve Walt, Taming
                             ­American power: the global response to US primacy (New York: Norton, 2005); Stephen G. Brooks and William C.
                              Wohlforth, World out of balance: international relations and the challenge of American primacy (Princeton: Princeton
                              University Press, 2008).
                        18
                        International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 18                                                                                                                    11/12/2017 16:34
                 The end of liberal international order?
                 organized around a complex array of bargains, working relationships and insti-
                 tutions. (Indeed, in the early postwar years, most of the core agreements about
                 trade, finance and monetary relations were hammered out between the United
                 States and Britain.) These countries did not agree on everything, but relative
                 to the rest of the world, this was a small and homogeneous group of western
                 states. Their economies converged, their interests were aligned and they gener-
                 ally trusted each other. These countries were also on the same side of the Cold
                 War, and the American-led alliance system reinforced cooperation. This system of
                 alliance made it easier for the United States and its partners to make commitments
                 and bear burdens. It made it easier for European and east Asian states to agree to
                 operate within an American-led liberal order. In this sense, the Cold War roots
                 of the postwar liberal order reinforced the sense that the liberal democracies were
                 involved in a common political project.
                     With the end of the Cold War, these foundational supports for liberal order
                 were loosened. More, and more diverse, states entered the order—with new visions
                 and agendas. The post-Cold War era also brought into play new and complex
                 global issues, such as climate change, terrorism and weapons proliferation, and
                 the growing challenges of interdependence. These are particularly hard issues on
                 which to reach agreement among states coming from very different regions, with
                 similarly different political orientations and levels of development. As a result, the
                 challenges to multilateral cooperation have grown. At the core of these challenges
                 has been the problem of authority and governance. Who pays, who adjusts, who
                 leads? Rising non-western states began to seek a greater voice in the governance of
                 the expanding liberal order. How would authority across this order be redistrib-
                 uted? The old coalition of states—led by the United States, Europe and Japan—
                 built a postwar order on layers of bargains, institutions and working relationships.
                 But this old trilateral core is not the centre of the global system in the way it once
                 was. The crisis of liberal order today is in part a problem of how to reorganize
                 the governance of this order. The old foundations have been weakened, but new
                 bargains and governance arrangements are yet to be fully negotiated.22
                     Second, the crisis of the liberal order is a crisis of legitimacy and social purpose.
                 During the Cold War, the American-led postwar order had a shared sense that
                 it was a community of liberal democracies that were made physically safer and
                 economically more secure by affiliating with each other. The first several genera-
                 tions of the postwar period understood that to be inside this order was to be in a
                 political and economic space where their societies could prosper and be protected.
                 This sense was captured in John Ruggie’s notion of ‘embedded liberalism’. Trade
                 and economic openness were rendered more or less compatible with economic
                 security, stable employment and advancing living standards. The western-oriented
                 liberal order had features of a security community—a sort of mutual protection
                 society. Membership of this order was attractive because it provided tangible
                 rights and benefits. It was a system of multilateral cooperation that provided
                 22
                      For an overview of these governance challenges, see Amitav Acharya, Why govern? Rethinking demand and
                      progress in global governance (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016).
                                                                                                                        19
                 International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 19                                                                                             11/12/2017 16:34
                        G. John Ikenberry
                        national governments with tools and capacities to pursue economic stability and
                        advancement.
                            This idea of liberal order as a security community is often lost in the narratives
                        of the postwar era. The United States and its partners built an order—but they also
                        ‘formed a community’: one based on common interests, shared values and mutual
                        vulnerability. The common interests were manifest, for example, in the gains that
                        flowed from trade and the benefits of alliance cooperation. The shared values were
                        manifest in a degree of public trust and ready capacity for cooperation rooted in
                        the values and institutions of liberal democracy. Mutual vulnerability was a sense
                        that these countries were experiencing a similar set of large-scale perils—flowing
                        from the great dangers and uncertainties of geopolitics and modernity. This idea
                        of a western security community is hinted at in the concept of ‘risk society’ put
                        forward by sociologists Anthony Giddens and Ulrich Beck. Their argument is that
                        the rise of modernity—of an advanced and rapidly developing global system—
                        has generated growing awareness of and responses to ‘risk’. Modernization is an
                        inherently unsettling march into the future. A risk society is, as Beck defines it, ‘a
                        systematic way of dealing with hazards and insecurities induced and introduced by
                        modernisation itself ’.23 The Cold War intensified this sense of risk, and out of a
                        growing sense of shared economic and security vulnerabilities, the western liberal
                        democracies forged a security community.
                            With the end of the Cold War and the globalization of the liberal order, this
                        sense of security community was undermined. This happened in the first instance,
                        as noted above, through the rapid expansion in the number and variety of states
                        in the order. The liberal order lost its identity as a western security community.
                        It was now a far-flung platform for trade, exchange and multilateral cooperation.
                        The democratic world was now less Anglo-American, less western. It embodied
                        most of the world—developed, developing, North and South, colonial and post-
                        colonial, Asian and European. This too was a case of ‘success’ planting the seeds
                        of crisis. The result was an increasing divergence of views across the order about
                        its members, their place in the world, and their historical legacies and grievances.
                        There was less of a sense that liberal internationalism was a community with a
                        shared narrative of its past and future.
                            The social purposes of the liberal order were further undermined by rising
                        economic insecurity and grievance across the western industrial world. Since the
                        2008 financial crisis at least, the fortunes of workers and middle-class citizens in
                        Europe and the United States have stagnated.24 The expanding opportunities
                        and rising wages enjoyed by earlier postwar generations seem to have stalled. For
                        example, in the United States almost all the growth in wealth since the 1980s has
                        gone to the top 20 per cent of earners in society. The post-Cold War growth in
                        23
                           Ulrich Beck, Risk society: towards a new modernity (London: Sage, 1992), p. 7. See also Anthony Giddens and
                           Christopher Pierson, Making sense of modernity: conversations with Anthony Giddens (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford
                           University Press, 1998).
                        24
                           For evidence of stagnant and declining incomes among the working and middle classes in the US and Europe,
                           and connections to the election of Donald Trump and Brexit, see Ronald Ingelhart and Pippa Norris, Trump,
                           Brexit, and the rise of populism: economic have-nots and cultural backlash, working paper (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
                           Kennedy School, 19 July 2016).
                        20
                        International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 20                                                                                                              11/12/2017 16:34
                 The end of liberal international order?
                 trade and interdependence does not seem to have directly advanced the incomes
                 and life opportunities of many segments of the western liberal democracies. Branko
                 Milanovic has famously described the differential gains across the global system
                 over the last two decades as an ‘elephant curve’. Looking across global income
                 levels, Milanovic finds that the vast bulk of gains in real per capita income have
                 been made in two very different groups. One comprises workers in countries such
                 as China and India who have taken jobs in low-end manufacturing and service
                 jobs, and, starting at very low wage levels, have experienced dramatic gains—even
                 if they remain at the lower end of the global income spectrum. This is the hump
                 of the elephant’s back. The other group is the top 1 per cent—and, indeed, the
                 top 0.01 per cent—who have experienced massive increases in wealth. This is the
                 elephant’s trunk, extended upward.25 This stagnation in the economic fortunes
                 of the western working and middle classes is reinforced by long-term shifts in
                 technology, trade patterns, union organization and the sites for manufacturing
                 jobs.
                     Under these adverse economic conditions, it is harder today than in the past
                 to see the liberal order as a source of economic security and protection. Across
                 the western liberal democratic world, liberal internationalism looks more like
                 neo-liberalism—a framework for international capitalist transactions. The
                 ‘embedded’ character of liberal internationalism has slowly eroded.26 The social
                 purposes of the liberal order are not what they once were. It is less obvious today
                 that the liberal democratic world is a security community. What do citizens in
                 western democracies get from liberal internationalism? How does an open and
                 loosely rules-based international order deliver security—economic or physical—
                 to the lives of the great middle class? Liberal internationalism across the twentieth
                 century was tied to progressive agendas within western liberal democracies. Liberal
                 internationalism was seen not as the enemy of nationalism, but as a tool to give
                 governments capacities to pursue economic security and advancements at home.
                 What has happened in the last several decades is that this connection between
                 progressivism at home and liberal internationalism abroad has been broken.

                 Conclusions
                 For the past 70 years, liberal internationalism has been embedded in the postwar
                 American hegemonic order. It is an order that has been marked by economic
                 openness and security cooperation as well as collective efforts to keep the peace,
                 promote the rule of law, and sustain an array of international institutions
                 organized to manage the modern problems of interdependence. This expansive
                 version of liberal order emerged in fits and starts during the twentieth century as

                 25
                    Branko Milanovic, Global inequality: a new approach for the age of globalization (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
                    sity Press, 2016), ch. 1.
                 26
                    See Jeff D. Colgan and Robert O. Keohane, ‘The liberal order is rigged: fix it now or watch it wither’,
                    Foreign Affairs 96: 3, May–June 2017, pp. 36–44. For an account of the rise of neo-liberalism in the late twen-
                    tieth century, see Mark Blyth, Great transformation: economic ideas and institutional change in the twentieth century
                    (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002).
                                                                                                                                     21
                 International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 21                                                                                                           11/12/2017 16:34
                        G. John Ikenberry
                        the United States and Europe struggled with the great dangers and catastrophes
                        that shocked and shook the world—world war, economic depression, trade wars,
                        fascism, totalitarianism and vast social injustices. Today this American-led era of
                        liberal internationalism looks increasingly beleaguered. To bet on the future of
                        the global liberal order is a little bit like a second marriage—a triumph of hope
                        over experience. But it is important to take the long view. The liberal interna-
                        tional project has travelled from the eighteenth century to our own time through
                        repeated crises, upheavals, disasters and breakdowns—almost all of them worse
                        than those appearing today. Indeed, it might be useful to think about liberal inter-
                        national order the way John Dewey thought about democracy—as a framework
                        for coping with the inevitable problems of modern society. It is not a blueprint
                        for an ideal world order; it is a methodology or machinery for responding to the
                        opportunities and dangers of modernity.
                            The future of this liberal order hinges on the ability of the United States and
                        Europe—and increasingly a wider array of liberal democracies—to lead and
                        support it. This, in turn, depends on the ability of these leading liberal democ-
                        racies to remain stable, well functioning and internationalist. Can these states
                        recover their stability and bearings as liberal democracies? Can they regain their
                        legitimacy and standing as ‘models’ of advanced societies by finding solutions to
                        the current generation’s great problems—economic inequality, stagnant wages,
                        fiscal imbalances, environmental degradation, racial and ethnic conflicts, and so
                        forth? Global leadership hinges on state power, but also on the appeal and legiti-
                        macy of the ideals and principles that Great Powers embody and project. The
                        appeal and legitimacy of liberal internationalism will depend on the ability of the
                        United States and other states like it to re-establish their ability to function and to
                        find solutions to twenty-first-century problems.
                            It is worth remembering that American liberal internationalism was shaped and
                        enabled by the domestic programmes of the Progressives, the New Deal and the
                        Great Society. These initiatives aimed to address American economic and social
                        inequalities and reorganize the American state in view of the unfolding problems
                        of industrialism and globalization. FDR and the New Deal were the critical pivot
                        for America’s liberal internationalist vision of order.
                            It was an era of pragmatic and experimental domestic and foreign policy. It
                        was a moment when the regime principles of the American foundation and Civil
                        War were once again renewed and updated. It was a time of existential crisis—but
                        also of bold and visionary undertakings. The domestic progressive experience
                        provides an important lesson for those seeking to grapple with the present genera-
                        tion’s crisis of liberal democracy. The liberal internationalism of the twentieth
                        century was closely tied to domestic progressive policy and movements. The
                        internationalism of Wilson’s and FDR’s generations emerged from their efforts to
                        build a more progressive domestic order. Internationalism was put at the service
                        of strengthening the nation—that is, the ability of governments and national
                        leaders to make good on their promises to promote economic well-being and
                        social advancement.

                        22
                        International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 22                                                                                 11/12/2017 16:34
                 The end of liberal international order?
                     So the future of liberal internationalism hinges on two questions. First, can the
                 United States and other liberal democracies recapture their progressive political
                 orientation? America’s ‘brand’—as seen in parts of the non-western world—is
                 perceived to be neo-liberal, that is, single-minded in its commitment to capital and
                 markets. It is absolutely essential that the United States shatter this idea. Outside
                 the West—and indeed in most parts of Europe—this is not the core of the liberal
                 democratic vision of modern society. If there is an ideological ‘centre of gravity’
                 in the wider world of democracies, it is more social democratic and solidarist than
                 neo-liberal. Or, to put it simply: it looks more like the vision of liberal democracy
                 that was articulated by the United States during the New Deal and early postwar
                 decades. This was a period when economic growth was more inclusive and was
                 built around efforts to promote economic stability and social protections. If liberal
                 internationalism is to thrive, it will need to be built again on these sorts of progres-
                 sive foundations.
                     Second, can the United States and its old allies expand and rebuild a wider
                 coalition of states willing to cooperate within a reformed liberal global order? It is
                 a simple fact that the United States cannot base its leadership on the old coalition
                 of the West and Japan. It needs to actively court and co-opt the wider world of
                 developing democracies. It is already doing this, but it needs to make the enter-
                 prise integral to its grand strategic vision. The goal should be to reconfigure rights
                 and responsibilities in existing institutions to reflect the diffusion of power in an
                 increasingly multipolar world. This should be done in such a way as to cultivate
                 deeper relations with democratic states within the rising non-western developing
                 world. The global multilateral institutions—from the UN and IMF downwards—
                 need to be reformed to reflect this new global reality.
                     In the end, the sources of continuity in the postwar liberal international order
                 become visible when we look at the alternatives. The alternatives to liberal order
                 are various sorts of closed systems—a world of blocs, spheres and protectionist
                 zones. The best news for liberal internationalism is probably the simple fact that
                 more people will be harmed by the end of some sort of global liberal international
                 order than will gain. This does not mean it will survive, but it does suggest that
                 there are constituencies—even in the old industrial societies of the West—that
                 have reason to support it. Beyond this, there is simply no grand ideological alter-
                 native to a liberal international order. China does not have a model that the rest of
                 the world finds appealing. Neither does Russia. These are authoritarian capitalist
                 states. But this type of state does not translate into a broad set of alternative ideas
                 for the organization of world order. The values, interests and mutual vulner-
                 abilities that drove the rise and spread of liberal internationalism are still with us.
                 Crises and transformations in liberal internationalism have marked its 200-year
                 passage to the present. If liberal democracy survives this era, so too will liberal
                 internationalism.




                                                                                                      23
                 International Affairs 94: 1, 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ia/article-abstract/94/1/7/4762691
by Adam Ellsworth, Adam Ellsworth
on 25 January 2018




 INTA94_1_2_241_Ikenberry.indd 23                                                                           11/12/2017 16:34
Copyright of International Affairs is the property of Oxford University Press / USA and its
content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email
articles for individual use.
