# Source: jervis-2013-do-leaders-matter.pdf
# Converted: 2026-03-06 14:39
# Note: Line numbers here differ from PDF page numbers
---

                       Security Studies




                       ISSN: 0963-6412 (Print) 1556-1852 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/fsst20




                Do Leaders Matter and How Would We Know?

                Robert Jervis

                To cite this article: Robert Jervis (2013) Do Leaders Matter and How Would We Know?, Security
                Studies, 22:2, 153-179, DOI: 10.1080/09636412.2013.786909

                To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09636412.2013.786909




                        Published online: 08 May 2013.



                        Submit your article to this journal



                        Article views: 5110



                        View related articles



                        Citing articles: 12 View citing articles




                                       Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
                               http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=fsst20

Download by: [Rutgers University]                                                                           Date: 03 September 2017, At: 17:40
                                                                Security Studies, 22:153–179, 2013
                                                                Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
                                                                ISSN: 0963-6412 print / 1556-1852 online
                                                                DOI: 10.1080/09636412.2013.786909




                                                                 Do Leaders Matter and How Would We Know?

                                                                                                     ROBERT JERVIS



                                                                      This paper will explore the ambivalence or conflict in the literature
                                                                      about the extent to which leaders matter in international politics,




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                      commonly linked to the level-of-analysis question. One the one
                                                                      hand, national leaders are often larger than life figures with strong
                                                                      preferences and distinctive personalities who seem to leave their
                                                                      stamp on events. On the other hand, most IR scholars place great
                                                                      stress on the incentives and constraints posed by the environment,
                                                                      be it domestic or international. I will proceed in four sections. The
                                                                      first discusses the essential claims at stake, the kinds of evidence
                                                                      that could be adduced to support one position or the other, and
                                                                      the pathways by which individual differences can make themselves
                                                                      felt. The second section examines the implications for morality, re-
                                                                      sponsibility, and democratic theory. This discussion too will point
                                                                      to relevant methods, including ones that are contested. I will then
                                                                      turn to post-Cold War American foreign policy, skeptically exam-
                                                                      ine the claim that individual presidents, even George W. Bush,
                                                                      mattered as much as is generally believed and close by discussing
                                                                      the implications for democratic accountability and control.




                                                                      Robert Jervis is Adlai E. Stevenson Professor of International Politics at Columbia Uni-
                                                                versity. His most recent book is Why Intelligence Fails: Lessons from the Iranian Revolution
                                                                and the Iraq War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2010). He was president of the Amer-
                                                                ican Political Science Association in 2000–2001, received the National Academy of Science’s
                                                                tri-annual award for behavioral sciences contributions to avoiding nuclear war, and is the
                                                                founding editor of the International Security Studies Forum. This paper was originally pre-
                                                                sented at the “From Clinton to Bush to Obama: What Have We Learned about Presidents and
                                                                Foreign Policy?” conference, held at the Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia,
                                                                27–28 October 2011, and was co-sponsored by the Miller Center and Security Studies.
                                                                     He would like to thank the anonymous reviewers at Security Studies.

                                                                                                               153
                                                                154                                               R. Jervis

                                                                      The question of the extent to which leaders matter in international poli-
                                                                tics is as familiar as it is impossible to fully answer.1 Ambivalence is common
                                                                and, I believe, appropriate. On the one hand, national leaders are often
                                                                larger than life figures with strong preferences and distinctive personali-
                                                                ties who seem to leave their stamp on events. Who could doubt that the
                                                                world would have been very different without Woodrow Wilson, Winston
                                                                Churchill, Josef Stalin, Franklin Roosevelt, Mao Zedong, Richard Nixon, and
                                                                George W. Bush? On the other hand, most IR scholars place great stress on
                                                                the incentives and constraints posed by the environment, be it domestic or
                                                                international. When Harold Macmillan was asked what caused him to alter
                                                                his policies, he famously replied “events, dear boy, events,” and Abraham
                                                                Lincoln said “I claim not to have controlled events, but confess plainly that
                                                                events have controlled me.”2




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                      An interesting probe would be to write the history of the Cold War with-
                                                                out mentioning the name of either side’s leaders and see if a naı̈ve reader
                                                                could determine when personnel changes occurred. Consistent with argu-
                                                                ments that democracies maintain steadier foreign policies than autocracies, I
                                                                suspect that the changes would be more apparent on the Soviet side than on
                                                                the American. At the end of this paper I will return to this exercise for post-
                                                                Cold War American foreign policy, and here would just note the relevant
                                                                ambivalence. On the one hand, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, George
                                                                W. Bush, and Barack Obama are very different people with very different
                                                                outlooks on the world. Almost all of us felt strongly that these people or their
                                                                opponents should have been elected president in part because we felt that
                                                                they would conduct a better foreign policy. On the other hand, the continu-
                                                                ities throughout this period are striking, and the changes we find are more a
                                                                product of the situation than the views of the person in office—or, to put it



                                                                     1 It is commonly approached as the “level-of-analysis” question. Systematic exploration began with

                                                                Kenneth Waltz, Man, the State, and War (New York: Columbia University Press, 1959) who talked about
                                                                the three “images” of the causes of war. The term “levels of analysis” was coined by J. David Singer in his
                                                                review of Waltz, “The Level-of-Analysis Problem in International Relations,” World Politics 14 (October
                                                                1961); for a recent argument that individual differences matter, see Daniel Byman and Kenneth Pollack,
                                                                “Let Us Now Praise Great Men: Bringing the Statesman Back In,” International Security 25, no. 4 (Spring
                                                                2001): 107–46; and for a good case study see Stephen Benedict Dyson, The Blair Identity: Leadership and
                                                                Foreign Policy (Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press, 2009).
                                                                     2 There is no original and verified source for this quotation and it may be apocryphal. Robert Harris,

                                                                “As Macmillan Never Said: That’s Enough Quotations,” Telegraph, 4 June 2002, http://www.telegraph.
                                                                co.uk/comment/personal-view/3577416/As-Macmillan-never-said-thats-enough-quotations.html; David
                                                                Donald, Lincoln (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995), 514. Indeed the study of leadership has fallen out
                                                                of favor in political science, but for a recent and very interesting study, see Richard Samuels, Machiavelli’s
                                                                Children: Leaders and Their Legacies in Italy and Japan (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2003). A good
                                                                review of the literature is John Ahlquist and Margaret Levi, “Leadership: What It Means, What It Does,
                                                                and What We Want to Know About It,” Annual Review of Political Science, vol. 14 (Palo Alto, CA: Annual
                                                                Reviews, 2011), 1–24.
                                                                                                Do Leaders Matter?                           155

                                                                slightly differently, the situation (both domestic and international) may have
                                                                changed the views of the presidents.
                                                                     Because these debates tap into deep issues about agency, structure, and
                                                                human behavior, they are to be found in many disciplines. Psychologists
                                                                argue about whether situational or dispositional factors are more important in
                                                                human behavior, and they have found that people are prone to overestimate
                                                                the degree to which another’s actions are to be explained by his or her
                                                                internal predispositions and underestimate the role of the situation the person
                                                                is in. Historians make less of a fetish of these theoretical arguments, but
                                                                in practice enact them in arguments that give greater or lesser weight to
                                                                individuals and to circumstances. Among political scientists, those who study
                                                                personality point to the power of individual differences, but those who
                                                                endorse structural models find this hard to accept. All these debates contain




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                important but often underdeveloped implications for the responsibility that
                                                                people bear for their actions, as I will discuss below.
                                                                     I will proceed in four sections. The first discusses the essential claims at
                                                                stake, the kinds of evidence that could be adduced to support one position or
                                                                the other, and the pathways by which individual differences can make them-
                                                                selves felt. It unpacks the arguments and focuses on how we come to grips
                                                                with them. The second section examines the implications for morality, re-
                                                                sponsibility, and democratic theory. This discussion too will point to relevant
                                                                methods, including ones that are contested. The third section turns to post-
                                                                Cold War American foreign policy and skeptically examines the claim that
                                                                individual presidents, even George W. Bush, mattered as much as is gener-
                                                                ally believed. Finally, I discuss the implications for democratic accountability
                                                                and control.

                                                                     HOW AND WHY DO (AND DON’T) PRESIDENTS MATTER?

                                                                The argument that individual leaders do not matter and that the drivers of a
                                                                state’s foreign policy are to be found at the domestic or international level
                                                                implies one of three things (which could operate in concert). First, all people
                                                                who might come to power, at least in a particular country at a particular time,
                                                                have roughly the same values and beliefs. This could be because the country
                                                                is homogeneous on these dimensions or because those who think differently
                                                                cannot rise to the top. Societies, of course, are not uniform, but many values
                                                                and beliefs are widely shared, and people outside the mainstream will not
                                                                be selected for leadership positions.
                                                                      Second, leaders might be socialized once they take office. The tendency
                                                                for people to become captured by the organization they join is well known.
                                                                It is amazing how quickly leaders who come into a position with a pledge
                                                                to make fundamental changes learn that the organization’s ways of doing
                                                                things make a great deal of sense. Academics all have seen the changes that
                                                                156                                             R. Jervis

                                                                happen to their colleagues who become deans, something that cannot be
                                                                entirely explained by self-selection. Bureaucracies are intellectually as well
                                                                as politically powerful and provide the newcomer with information, a view
                                                                of the world, and a home. This is more true for cabinet officers than for the
                                                                president, but the White House has its own institutionalized interests and
                                                                perspectives as well, and so it is not surprising that despite his criticisms
                                                                of them when he was a candidate, President Obama did not relinquish the
                                                                executive powers his predecessor had amassed, although he probably would
                                                                not have expanded them as Bush did had he been president after 9/11.
                                                                     Third, leaders are constrained. Even if they are not socialized or cap-
                                                                tured, they are likely to find that their freedom of action is sharply limited.
                                                                Both the second and the third processes were at work when, two years
                                                                after he became Dwight Eisenhower’s secretary of state, John Foster Dulles




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                responded to the argument for a more aggressive policy, if not preventive
                                                                war, in the following way (in the words of National Security Council (NSC)
                                                                minutes):

                                                                       He could not help but have some sympathy for the general view of the
                                                                       Joint Chiefs of Staff in favor of greater dynamism in the American attitude
                                                                       toward the Soviet Union and Communist China. After all, during the
                                                                       course of the 1952 campaign he had himself called for a more dynamic
                                                                       U.S. policy vis-a-vis Communism. However, experience indicated that it
                                                                       was not easy to go very much beyond the point that this administration
                                                                       had reached in translating a dynamic policy into courses of action. . . . 3

                                                                     Perhaps Dulles should have been embarrassed, but as far as I can tell
                                                                he was not, although he did claim—incorrectly and half-heartedly—that “in
                                                                any case we had been more dynamic than our predecessors.” He had simply
                                                                confronted the facts of international life.
                                                                     As the Dulles quotation implies, the degree to which there is freedom of
                                                                choice and room for individual preferences depends in significant measure
                                                                on how compelling the external environment is. To use Arnold Wolfers’
                                                                analogy, if the house is on fire we do not have to know anything about
                                                                the individuals in it to predict that they will rush for the exits.4 But there
                                                                are problems with this simple truth. While people may not only say but
                                                                believe that they lack agency in order to politically and psychologically
                                                                distance themselves from the unpleasant behavior they are undertaking, a

                                                                     3 Department of State, Foreign Relations of the United States, 1952–1954, vol. 2, National Security

                                                                Affairs, pt. 1, (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1984), 833.
                                                                     4 Arnold Wolfers, Discord and Collaboration (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1962), 13. For evi-

                                                                dence that differences in perceptions among decision makers decreased as tensions increased, see Ole
                                                                Holsti, “Individual Differences in ‘Definition of the Situation,’ ” Journal of Conflict Resolution 14, no.
                                                                3 (September 1970): 303–10. For a different kind of argument about the role of context, see Stephen
                                                                Skowronek, The Politics Presidents Make: Leadership from John Adams to George Bush (Cambridge, MA:
                                                                Harvard University Press, 1993).
                                                                                                          Do Leaders Matter?                                          157

                                                                different person might have responded differently. Related, how compelling
                                                                the environment is can be in the eye of the beholder, which makes this
                                                                proposition dangerously circular: when the situation is compelling, people
                                                                will behave in the same way, and we know the situation is compelling
                                                                because people with different predispositions behave the same way. Even
                                                                though some situations may seem objectively clearer than others, and most
                                                                would agree that the current era offers American leaders much greater leeway
                                                                than did the Cold War, the fact that the terms hawks and doves were coined
                                                                in that period reminds us that agreement that the situation was grave did
                                                                not preclude strong differences on what should be done. Nevertheless, not
                                                                all situations are created equal. Not all people are either, and where one
                                                                person might feel trapped another could see room for choice. There is an
                                                                interaction between individuating and circumstantial factors.5 Andrew Polsky




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                argues that at the start of a war presidents, and presumably leaders of other
                                                                countries, have a fairly brief window to direct broad policy, and after that
                                                                their room to maneuver drastically shrinks.6
                                                                      Sometimes continuity is produced by opportunity as well as constraint.
                                                                Part of Barack Obama’s campaign platform was that he would roll back the
                                                                expansion of presidential power that had taken place under Bush. Presi-
                                                                dential signing statements that declared some part of laws unconstitutional
                                                                and not binding, infringements on civil liberties in the name of keeping the
                                                                country safe, the use of government power to keep information from courts,
                                                                and other abuses were to be foresworn. Although it may be dismaying to
                                                                some of us because of our political views, as political scientists we should
                                                                not have been surprised that once in office Obama found that these tools
                                                                were too alluring to renounce. Presidents like presidential power no matter
                                                                what their personal preferences.
                                                                      Some foreign policy opportunities seem too good to pass up as well.
                                                                Again Obama provides an example, albeit a less clear-cut one. Because he
                                                                was sharply critical of the invasion of Iraq, it appears that Obama’s gen-
                                                                eral predilections were against intervening except where it was necessary to
                                                                fight terrorism. Yet the Libyan case seemed too tempting to resist: not only
                                                                was there some (overstated, I believe) danger of a massacre, but interven-
                                                                tion was supported by the Arab League and the UN, and most of the work
                                                                was to be done by Britain and France. If he had been a really committed
                                                                anti-interventionist he probably would have resisted, but people of a wide


                                                                     5 For a brief but suggestive discussion of this question, see James Rosenau, “Pre-Theories and the

                                                                Theories of Foreign Policy,” in Approaches to Comparative and International Politics, ed. R. Barry Farrell
                                                                (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1966), 47–48.
                                                                     6 Andrew Polsky, Elusive Victories: The American Presidency at War (New York: Oxford University

                                                                Press, 2012); for instances in which a powerful leader chose not to act in a way that might have altered
                                                                the situation, see Jonathan Steinberg, Bismarck: A Life (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 361,
                                                                364–65.
                                                                158                                             R. Jervis

                                                                range of views would see Libya as an atypical case that merited military
                                                                action.7


                                                                Differences and Discontinuities
                                                                The basic way we try to determine whether the identity of the president or
                                                                any other leader matters is by using comparisons and counterfactuals. With
                                                                the former we try to see if different leaders or different kinds of leaders follow
                                                                different policies in similar circumstances, and whether the same person or
                                                                similar people behave in ways that are consistent over time, especially when
                                                                the context changes. This is not easy in practice, of course. It is hard to
                                                                determine whether the situation is different and, less remarked upon, it is
                                                                difficult to be sure that a particular kind of situation is not responsible for




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                the rise of a particular kind of leader. Methodologically, the deaths of leaders
                                                                (especially from natural causes) are a godsend because they usually eliminate
                                                                this possibility of endogeneity.8 Very close elections (2000 is the obvious one)
                                                                are also useful in this regard. When a new president comes to power with
                                                                greater support and changes the previous policy, however, this may reflect
                                                                an alteration of the external environment or changed domestic interests and
                                                                outlooks as well as that new president’s preferences.9 The president may be
                                                                more a carrier of these forces than an independent causal factor. But when
                                                                a leader comes to power through an accident or what comes as close as
                                                                we can get to a random assignment, we are on firmer ground in attributing
                                                                changed policies to factors we can associate with that president.
                                                                      This is firmer, but not entirely firm. No matter how presidents come into
                                                                office, if their predecessor was popular, they may have to continue his or
                                                                her policies, at least for a while. If their predecessor was unpopular, leaders
                                                                may need to institute changes even if they would prefer not to. Most newly
                                                                elected presidents want to differentiate themselves from their successors. If
                                                                George W. Bush was a bit extreme in his commitment to follow the ABC rule


                                                                     7 Robert Pape, “When Duty Calls: A Pragmatic Standard of Humanitarian Intervention,” International

                                                                Security 37, no. 1 (Summer 2012): 41–80.
                                                                     8 For an example, see Benjamin Jones and Benjamin Olken, “Hit or Miss? The Effects of Assassination

                                                                on Institutions and War,” American Economic Journal 1, no. 2 (July 2009): 55–87. I am grateful to
                                                                Elizabeth Saunders for this citation. For attempts to deal with endogeneity in the context of determining
                                                                the efficacy of the strategy of killing leaders of insurgencies, see Bryan Price “Targeting Top Terrorists:
                                                                How Leadership Decapitation Contributes to Counterterrorism,” International Security 4, no. 36 (Spring
                                                                2012): 9–46 and Patrick Johnston, “Does Decapitation Work? Assessing the Effectiveness of Leadership
                                                                Targeting in Counterinsurgency Campaigns,” International Security 4, no. 36 (Spring 2012): 47–79.
                                                                     9 Much of the political economy literature can be read in this way. See, for example, Peter Trubowitz,

                                                                Defining the National Interest: Conflict and Change in American Foreign Policy (Chicago: University of
                                                                Chicago Press, 1998); Benjamin Fordham, Building the Cold War Consensus: The Political Economy of U.S.
                                                                National Security Policy, 1946–1951 (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1998); and, for grander
                                                                but flawed claims, Mark Brawley, Liberal Leadership: Great Powers and Their Challengers in Peace and
                                                                War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1993).
                                                                                                           Do Leaders Matter?                                         159

                                                                (Anything But what Clinton did), the impulse is a common one. Furthermore,
                                                                the transition itself is a cause to be reckoned with. It takes any administration
                                                                at least a year to find its legs, and this period is almost always rocky. To the
                                                                obvious examples of the Bay of Pigs and John F. Kennedy’s performance
                                                                at the Vienna Summit meeting, we can add Bush’s flirtation with extending
                                                                an unambiguous deterrent umbrella over a Taiwan that could move toward
                                                                independence (quite contrary to what he did when he had more experi-
                                                                ence) and Obama’s demanding that Israel impose a complete freeze on the
                                                                settlements to start negotiation with the Palestinians.10 These rookie errors
                                                                plague every administration. Even the Eisenhower administration, which was
                                                                well-organized and had an experienced team, floundered when Stalin died
                                                                three months after it took office.
                                                                      We can also look for discontinuities, not between presidents, but be-




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                tween their views and those of their advisors. At first glance, this seems close
                                                                to a smoking gun—many people want to do one thing, but the president
                                                                decides to do another. There are cases like this, including ones in which the
                                                                president seems to act on gut instinct, as Deborah Larson argues was true
                                                                of Harry Truman in the decision to stay in Berlin in the face of the Soviet
                                                                blockade and, in parallel, when he refused to forcibly repatriate Chinese and
                                                                North Korean POWs even though doing so could have ended the Korean
                                                                War (and greatly increased the chance that a Democrat would be elected in
                                                                1952).11 But, good as this evidence is, it is not perfect. Even when presidents
                                                                do not have more and different information than their colleagues, they hold
                                                                a different position and feel different pressures. Especially when they know
                                                                that the final decision is the president’s, advisors have more freedom in what
                                                                they advocate. It is far from certain that a secretary of state who calls for one
                                                                course of action would take the same advice if he or she were president.
                                                                Role rather than individual difference can explain the discrepancies.
                                                                      Continuities speak against individual differences, but sometimes they
                                                                can mask the deep impact of the policy a president adopted and that others
                                                                at the time would not have. One does not have to endorse an extreme ver-
                                                                sion of path-dependence to argue that there are turning points or windows
                                                                of opportunity when a situation is in flux. How the state acts then can have
                                                                great influence for years to come, making it difficult to move off this track in
                                                                subsequent years. One possible—and debatable—example is Bush’s refusal
                                                                to explore the possible feeler from Iran in late 2002 to negotiate the funda-
                                                                mental issues between the two countries, especially Iran’s nuclear program.

                                                                     10 A thorough and fascinating discussion of the Bay of Pigs decision-making is Piero Gleijeses, “Ships

                                                                Passing in the Night: The CIA, the White House and the Bay of Pigs,” Journal of Latin American Studies
                                                                27, no. 1 (February 1995): 1–42.
                                                                     11 Deborah Larson, “Truman and the Berlin Blockade: The Role of Intuition and Experience in Good

                                                                Foreign Policy Judgment,” in Good Judgment in Foreign Policy: Theory and Application, eds., Stanley
                                                                Renshon and Deborah Larson (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2003), 127–52; Larson, “The Origins of
                                                                Commitment: Truman and West Berlin,” Journal of Cold War Studies 13, no. 1 (Winter 2011): 180–212.
                                                                160                                              R. Jervis

                                                                If we assume for the sake of argument that this was a genuine overture,
                                                                rejecting it may well have confirmed Iran’s leaders in their fears that the
                                                                United States would settle for nothing less than regime change and that it
                                                                was imperative to resume the quest for the capability to produce nuclear
                                                                weapons as soon as it was safe to do so. While the inability of the Obama
                                                                administration to reach an agreement with Iran and its decision instead to
                                                                ratchet up the sanctions may at first glance seem to illustrate the power of the
                                                                external environment, if this story is correct, the environment was decisively
                                                                influenced by what Bush had done, and another president might have acted
                                                                in a way that would have set US policy and relations with Iran on quite a
                                                                different path.
                                                                     Of course none of these comparisons will be perfect, and the num-
                                                                ber of them that are most appropriate will remain small. So we can also




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                use counterfactuals, although the rules of this game are easy to dispute.12
                                                                Nevertheless, the claim that the characteristics of an individual leader matter
                                                                implies that the state’s policy would have been significantly different had
                                                                someone of different characteristics been in power. This is always true if we
                                                                make an extreme mental substitute—had Adolf Hitler been president, Ameri-
                                                                can foreign policy would have been enormously different. But this could not
                                                                occur unless the United States had been transformed into a fundamentally
                                                                different country. More illuminating counterfactuals would replace a presi-
                                                                dent with one of his or her main challengers or with someone who was a
                                                                plausible candidate but chose not to run.13 During the Cold War the range of
                                                                foreign policy views that a person who might be elected to office could hold
                                                                was narrower than it is now, but even in the previous period temperaments
                                                                and styles could vary considerably. Thus it could be argued that the Cuban
                                                                Missile Crisis might have ended in war had Nixon been president (assuming
                                                                that Fidel Castro still would have been in power in 1962—i.e., that Nixon
                                                                would not have carried out a successful invasion of the island—and that
                                                                Khrushchev would have enacted the same policy) because he was more
                                                                headstrong than Kennedy. More obviously, but still debatably, had Kennedy
                                                                not been assassinated, his distrust of the military might have led him to reject
                                                                the advice to fight in Vietnam.


                                                                     12 The relevant literature is very large. See, for example, James Fearon, “Counterfactuals and Hypoth-

                                                                esis Testing in Political Science,” World Politics 43, no. 2 (January 1991); George Breslauer and Aaron
                                                                Belkin, eds., Counterfactuals in World Politics: Logical, Methodological, and Psychological Perspectives
                                                                (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996); Richard Ned Lebow, Forbidden Fruit: Counterfactuals
                                                                and International Relations (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2010); Jack Levy, “Counterfactuals
                                                                and Case Studies,” in Oxford Handbook of Political Methodology, ed., Janet Box-Steffensmeier, Henry
                                                                Brady, and David Collier (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008), 627–44.
                                                                     13 In other words, to be useful counterfactuals should be plausible and should rewrite history as little

                                                                as possible. An excellent analysis that turns this method around and asks what would have had to have
                                                                been different for World War I to have been avoided is Paul Schroeder, Systems, Stability, and Statecraft:
                                                                Essays on the International History of Modern Europe (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004), chap. 8.
                                                                                                           Do Leaders Matter?                                          161

                                                                Mechanisms
                                                                The identity of the president can matter through four main channels or
                                                                mechanisms. To start with, policy can reflect the outlook, values, and beliefs
                                                                of a president that result in preferences that, if not unique to him, at least are
                                                                different from those of others who had been or could be president. Second,
                                                                presidents, like the rest of us, presumably have distinctive personalities and
                                                                styles that can affect behavior.14 In some cases, of course, these can be closely
                                                                linked to preferences. But this need not be the case, just as in everyday life
                                                                knowing that a person is agreeable or compulsive may not tell us much about
                                                                the substance of that person’s views. Third, presidents vary in their political
                                                                style and skill, which in turn influences their ability to mobilize support
                                                                for their policies (and also affects their chances of being reelected). Fourth,
                                                                less obviously and probably less importantly, different presidents generate




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                different environments. My discussion will proceed in reverse order.
                                                                     Different presidents face different domestic and international landscapes
                                                                by virtue of who they succeed, what their domestic bases are, and how they
                                                                are viewed by other countries. The basic points are well known even if
                                                                we tend to overlook them when we focus on why and how presidents
                                                                matter. Much is summed up in the phrase “Only Nixon could go to China.”
                                                                The fact that Nixon was seen as such a staunch anti-communist gave him
                                                                the freedom to lead a rapprochement with the People’s Republic of China
                                                                (PRC), essentially selling out Taiwan in the way that no Democrat could
                                                                have. Conversely, because in the 2008 campaign Obama criticized Bush over
                                                                Iraq, he had to bolster his national security bona fides by calling Afghanistan
                                                                “the necessary war” and pledging a greater effort there. But if presidents have
                                                                some freedom and even incentives to play against type, they cannot afford to
                                                                leave their bases too far behind. Nixon shrewdly calculated that by 1971 the
                                                                “China Lobby” was a mere shadow of its former self; had he been elected
                                                                in 1960, it is doubtful that he could have performed the same maneuver.


                                                                     14 In the past few years scholars have paid increasing attention to the impact on political views

                                                                of the “Big Five” dimensions of personality (openness to experience, conscientiousness, extraversion,
                                                                agreeableness, and emotional stability). See for example Jeffery Mondak, Personality and the Foundations
                                                                of Political Behavior (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010); Alan Gerber, Gregory Huber, David
                                                                Doherty, and Conor Dowling, “The Big Five Personality Traits in the Political Arena,” Annual Review of
                                                                Political Science, vol. 14 (Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews, 2011), 265–87; Dana Carney, John Jost, Sammy
                                                                Gosling, and Jeff Potter, “The Secret Lives of Liberals and Conservatives: Personality Profiles, Interaction
                                                                Styles, and the Things They Leave Behind,” Political Psychology 29, no. 6 (December 2008): 807–40. The
                                                                classic study of the lines of division on foreign policy in the general public is Ole Holsti, Public Opinion
                                                                and American Foreign Policy, rev. ed. (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2004). Holsti and James
                                                                Rosenau authored a series of studies of elite opinion. See, for example, Holsti and Rosenau, “The Political
                                                                Foundations of Elites’ Domestic and Foreign Policy Beliefs,” in The Domestic Sources of American Foreign
                                                                Policy, ed., Eugene Wittkopf and James McCormick (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 1998), 33–50;
                                                                “Liberals, Populists, Libertarians and Conservatives: The Link Between Domestic and International Affairs,”
                                                                International Political Science Review 17, no. 1 (January 1996): 29–55; and American Leadership in World
                                                                Affairs: Vietnam and the Breakdown of Consensus (Boston: Allen and Unwin, 1984).
                                                                162                                            R. Jervis

                                                                A president’s base can constrain him, and while Obama has disappointed
                                                                his supporters in many ways, I think he would have found it harder than
                                                                John McCain to leave a large residual force in Iraq—and indeed the other
                                                                disappointments with him made it especially hard for him to do so.
                                                                     International audiences can also view different presidents differently,
                                                                presenting them with different opportunities and dangers. Obama certainly
                                                                gained by being the non-Bush and could assert at least some leadership
                                                                because of this. Many leaders who had opposed Bush not only wanted
                                                                Obama to succeed, but wanted to be seen as helping him, in part because
                                                                they needed to show that their previous stance was not a reflection of
                                                                being anti-American. The result was to allow Obama to take a new path
                                                                without being accused of giving in to foreign pressure, and this possibility
                                                                would have been open for any new president. This means that to assert that




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                different presidents follow different policies is not the same as to claim that
                                                                the explanation lies in their personal characteristics and preferences.
                                                                     The next carrier of consequential individual difference is political skill,
                                                                about which it is difficult to theorize.15 Here we would find skillful presidents
                                                                differing from less skillful ones not in the content of their policies, but in
                                                                their ability to get what they want through their gift for reading the domestic
                                                                political currents, appealing to public opinion, and maintaining coalitions.
                                                                Related, some presidents are better at using the machinery of government
                                                                than others. These people will suffer less from the slings and arrows of out-
                                                                rageous bureaucracy, thwarting the tendency for departments to implement
                                                                the president’s policies in ways that they want, but the president does not
                                                                want, curbing the unruly and disruptive ambitions of cabinet officers, and
                                                                drawing the best from the government in terms of information and options.
                                                                A different kind of skill was displayed by Winston Churchill, whose most im-
                                                                portant contribution to victory in World War II may have been less the policy
                                                                decisions he made (with the exception of convincing his colleagues to reject
                                                                peace overtures in the wake of the fall of France) than it was in his fierce
                                                                and unflagging determination that inspired the British government, armed
                                                                forces, and nation. In a parallel fashion, the assassination of the chair of the
                                                                Afghanistan’s High Peace Council, Burhanuddin Rabbani, in September 2011
                                                                had deleterious effects not because of his preferences, but because of his
                                                                unique connections throughout the contesting Afghan factions. Returning to
                                                                a president, Jimmy Carter’s self-righteousness may have both impelled him
                                                                to try tasks like bringing peace to the Middle East that would have daunted
                                                                more sensible people and harmed him by alienating some of those with
                                                                whom he had to work. But evidence is difficult here. Although any book

                                                                     15 The classic treatment is Richard Neustadt, President Power: The Politics of Leadership from FDR

                                                                to Carter (New York: Wiley, 1980); also see Eugene Bardach, The Skill Factor in Politics (Berkeley:
                                                                University of California Press, 1972); Mark Schafer and Scott Crichlow, Groupthink Versus High-Quality
                                                                Decision-Making in International Relations (New York: Columbia University Press, 2011).
                                                                                                           Do Leaders Matter?                                          163

                                                                about a particular president will comment on his strengths and weaknesses
                                                                as a political leader, often the reasoning is circular: it is obvious that Carter
                                                                had little skill because so much of his program failed and he was defeated
                                                                for reelection; Lyndon Johnson’s legislative successes attest to his skill within
                                                                the government, but the steady increase in opposition to the war in Vietnam
                                                                shows his inability to operate well with mass opinion. Causal inferences are
                                                                also complicated by the possibility of anticipated reactions as less skillful
                                                                presidents feel greater pressures to adopt policies they expect to be popular
                                                                because if they understand their own limits, they will see that they could not
                                                                get the country to follow any other course of action.
                                                                      We usually expect a skill that is consistently displayed in one area to
                                                                be found in others as well. But sometimes this is not the case, perhaps
                                                                for psycho-dynamic reasons. Thus Otto von Bismarck was an outstanding




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                diplomat in part because of his great ability to discern how others would
                                                                react to what Prussia, and then Germany, would do. But in domestic politics
                                                                and, even more so, personal relations, he was obtuse.16
                                                                      There are many more studies of presidents’ personalities. Although these
                                                                may on occasion be systematically linked to preferences (e.g., a belligerent
                                                                person may favor belligerent foreign policies),17 more often the dependent
                                                                variable is less the content of the policy than the way in which it is reached
                                                                and the president’s general orientation toward his job and the world. These
                                                                studies can be of an individual, gaining their explanatory power through
                                                                showing patterns that persist throughout the president’s career, bolstered by
                                                                analyses of why this pattern arose and the psychological needs it met, or they
                                                                can locate patterns across presidents who share certain characteristics, espe-
                                                                cially in terms of having egos damaged in specified ways. Thus Alexander
                                                                George and Juliette George argue that Wilson would dig in his heels when
                                                                challenged in an area that he believed fell within his core competence and
                                                                that this explains his self-defeating stubbornness in the fight over ratification
                                                                of the League Covenant, and Jonathan Steinberg argues that because of their
                                                                childhoods, Johnson and Nixon, but not Eisenhower, had a pathological fear
                                                                of being humiliated, and this explains why the former two but not the latter
                                                                were trapped in Vietnam.18 More generally, James David Barber categorized

                                                                     16 See Steinberg, Bismarck, 469. He attributes this and, more substantively, Bismarck’s unwillingness

                                                                to share power to his conception of a “sovereign self” that in part grew out of “the agony of his childhood,
                                                                the little boy at the point of upside-down triangle and at the mercy of the struggle between the threatening
                                                                woman and the weak man,” a configuration that was recapitulated in his dependence on King and then
                                                                Kaiser William I, who was both weak and the ultimate source of Bismarck’s power.
                                                                      17 See, for example, Lloyd Etheredge, A World of Men: The Private Sources of American Foreign

                                                                Policy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1978).
                                                                      18 1 Alexander George and Juliette George, Woodrow Wilson and Colonel House: A Personality Study

                                                                (New York: John Day, 1956); Blema Steinburg, Shame and Humiliation: Presidential Decision Making
                                                                on Vietnam (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1996) (but for the argument that Eisenhower did
                                                                want to intervene, see Fredrik Logvall, Embers of War: The Fall of an Empire and the Making of America’s
                                                                Vietnam (New York: Random House, 2012), 420–504). For a good argument that we probably can find
                                                                164                                               R. Jervis

                                                                presidents by whether their coping styles were active or passive and whether
                                                                they had a positive or negative orientation toward the office.19
                                                                      Presidents, like ordinary people, differ on such traits as impulsiveness,
                                                                tolerance for ambiguity, willingness (and even desire) to hear conflicting
                                                                views, stubbornness, and, what is perhaps a cause of some of these, per-
                                                                sonal security or insecurity. Psychologists have explored the ways and extent
                                                                to which characteristics like these are linked to basic political attitudes, espe-
                                                                cially along the liberal-conservative spectrum, although we should be a bit
                                                                careful because the results that flatter liberals are produced by a discipline
                                                                heavily populated by liberals. Nevertheless, the findings are at least sugges-
                                                                tive and while they do not directly bear on foreign policy, there do seem to
                                                                be links between a more closed intellectual style and a predisposition to-
                                                                ward tough measures and the use of force.20 Indeed, folk wisdom on both




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                the left and right agrees here, although it puts a different evaluation on the
                                                                description. Liberals say that contemplative leaders are more likely to be
                                                                able to find peaceful ways to resolve conflict, while conservatives say that
                                                                those who seem open-minded simply lack the stomach for standing up for
                                                                their country’s rights. Solid data is scarce, however, and it is not clear how
                                                                much evidence from survey data would tell us about such links in the beliefs
                                                                and behavior of the highly selected group of people who become national
                                                                leaders.
                                                                      Trust, assuming it is a stable characteristic that acts across domains, can
                                                                have a more straightforward impact on policies. Presidents who are more
                                                                trusting will be willing to enter into more and riskier agreements than will
                                                                those who are low on this dimension. They will place a higher likelihood
                                                                on others cooperating and will accept arrangements in which reciprocity is
                                                                delayed and inexact, in part out of the belief that the other will see the long-
                                                                run advantages of a sustained relationship. Inspection and verification will

                                                                patterns, but that tracing them to childhood experiences is usually beyond our reach, see Philip Tetlock,
                                                                Faye Crosby, and Travis Crosby, “Political Psychobiography,” Micropolitics 1, no. 2 (1981): 191–213.
                                                                     19 James David Barber, The Presidential Character: Predicting Performance in the White House

                                                                (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1972); for a vigorous critique of this book, see Alexander George,
                                                                “Assessing Presidential Character,” World Politics 26, no. 2 (January 1974): 234–82. Also see Fred Green-
                                                                stein, The Presidential Difference: Leadership Style from FDR to George W. Bush (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
                                                                University Press, 2004); Robert Dallek, Hail to the Chief: The Making and Unmaking of American Presi-
                                                                dents (New York: Hyperion, 1996); Dean Simonton, “Presidential IQ, Openness, Intellectual Brilliance, and
                                                                Leadership,” Political Psychology 27, no. 4 (August 2006): 511–26. The role of emotion in determining a
                                                                person’s style is generally neglected, although it is implicit in Barber’s formulation. For interesting studies
                                                                of emotion in this context, see Barbara Keys, “Henry Kissinger: The Emotional Statesmen,” Diplomatic
                                                                History 35, no. 4 (September 2011): 587–610; Frank Costigliola, “Broken Circle, The Isolation of Franklin
                                                                D. Roosevelt in World War II,” Diplomatic History 32, no. 5 (November 2008): 677–718; Frank Costigliola,
                                                                Roosevelt’s Lost Alliance’s (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2012). On links between style and the
                                                                way presidents have organized the foreign policy process, see Thomas Preston, The President and His
                                                                Inner Circle: Leadership Style and the Advisory Process in Foreign Affairs (New York: Columbia University
                                                                Press, 2001).
                                                                     20 For a summary, see John Jost, Christopher Federico, and Jaime Napier, “Political Ideology: Its

                                                                Structure, Functions, and Elective Affinities,” Annual Review of Psychology 60 (2009): 318–19.
                                                                                                           Do Leaders Matter?                                          165

                                                                not be neglected, but are not likely to be seen as insurmountable barriers,
                                                                and multilateral endeavors will be seen as advantageous and possible. It
                                                                would seem that trust and liberalism would be at least weakly correlated,
                                                                but this might be a function not of underlying orientations, but of the context
                                                                of post-World War II international politics.21
                                                                      The most common approach here is to ask whether presidents have
                                                                different, deep, and consistent preferences that deeply affect their responses
                                                                to particular events. In their strongest form, we can ask about their ideolo-
                                                                gies.22 Of course our normal left-right spectrum does not directly apply to
                                                                foreign policy, although there may be some correlations. Various typologies
                                                                have been offered, and for recent presidents we would be concerned with
                                                                dimensions like multilateralism versus unilateralism, isolationism versus in-
                                                                volvement throughout the world, broad or narrow conceptions of national




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                interest, belligerence, and the propensity to use force versus a more con-
                                                                ciliatory outlook (or, in parallel, dispositions to see situations as resembling
                                                                a security dilemma/prisoner’s dilemma or as ones that require deterrence
                                                                if not force)—dimensions which have some overlap with each other—and
                                                                perhaps with trust.
                                                                      Although it would be an exaggeration to say that everyone is born into
                                                                this world a little hawk or a little dove, whether because of personality
                                                                characteristics or lessons learned about politics, political leaders do vary in
                                                                their predispositions to see foreign threats and the propensity to believe
                                                                that they require a forceful if not forcible response. It is not likely to be an
                                                                accident that most of those who believed that deterrence and arms build-ups
                                                                were necessary to cope with the Soviet threat also believed that the post-
                                                                Cold War world was filled with latent nemesis, and that after September 11,
                                                                2001 these people saw terrorism as an enormous threat, one that required a
                                                                war. In parallel, most of those who thought that the Cold War, at least by the
                                                                1980s, was in large measure a security dilemma also believed that the United
                                                                States confronted few security threats after the Soviet Union disintegrated,
                                                                did not greatly worry about a resurgent Russia, thought that the rise of China
                                                                could be best coped with by conciliation, and in the wake of 9/11 not only
                                                                opposed the war in Iraq, but felt that the threat from terrorism was being
                                                                exaggerated and would be best countered by police and sharply focused

                                                                     21 Brian Rathbun, “The ‘Magnificent Fraud’: Trust, International Cooperation, and the Hidden Do-

                                                                mestic Politics of American Multilateralism after World War II,” International Studies Quarterly 55, no.
                                                                1 (March 2011): 1–22; Paul Brewer et al. “International Trust and Public Opinion About World Affairs,”
                                                                American Journal of Political Science 48, no. 1 (January 2004): 83–109; Paul Brewer and Marco Steen-
                                                                bergen, “All Against All: How Beliefs about Human Nature Shape Foreign Policy Opinions,” Political
                                                                Psychology 23, no. 1 (March 2002): 39–58; Kevin Binning, “‘It’s Us Against the World’: How Distrust
                                                                in Americans Versus People-In-General Shapes Competitive Foreign Policy Preferences,” Political Psy-
                                                                chology 28, no. 6 (December 2007): 777–99; Eric Usalner, The Moral Foundations of Trust (New York:
                                                                Cambridge University Press, 2002).
                                                                     22 For a good recent study of the role of ideologies in mass political opinion, see Jost, Federico, and

                                                                Napier, “Political Ideology,” 307–37.
                                                                166                                           R. Jervis

                                                                intelligence operations. There are few logical links here, which means that
                                                                it is more a psychological predisposition than a clear theory of how the
                                                                world works that links these preferences. Perhaps past fear of the Soviet
                                                                Union and the belief that Islamic terrorism is a fundamental challenge are
                                                                part of an underlying belief in the power of ideology or a focus on troubling
                                                                transitions to modernity,23 but the former could not explain why China or
                                                                Russia would be seen as likely to use force to change the status quo, and
                                                                the latter would lead to fear of many countries.
                                                                      A parallel difference stems from the fact that levels of analysis not only
                                                                is employed in academic papers, but is part of the mental furniture of many
                                                                leaders.24 That is, they differ in the causal weight they place on the char-
                                                                acteristics of individual leaders, the domestic sources of foreign policy, and
                                                                the external environment. Realists stress the latter, but this cuts against the




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                grain of many Americans, members of the general public, and leaders alike.
                                                                Ronald Reagan believed that the Soviet Union was much less of a men-
                                                                ace once it moved toward becoming more pluralistic; George W. Bush and
                                                                many of his colleagues believed that if countries in the Middle East became
                                                                more democratic, they would adopt more benign foreign policies. Elizabeth
                                                                Saunders shows that how and where American presidents intervene abroad
                                                                is strongly influenced by their beliefs about whether and how domestic ar-
                                                                rangements shape others’ foreign policy. This crosscuts many of our standard
                                                                categorizations as it groups together Eisenhower and Johnson as externally
                                                                focused leaders who, while caring about whether other countries were about
                                                                to “go communist,” did not view other variations in domestic arrangements
                                                                as a source of threat or believe that domestic reforms were essential to sta-
                                                                bility, in contrast to internally focused leaders like Kennedy who were more
                                                                finely attuned to others’ domestic regimes and who saw internal reforms as
                                                                important.25
                                                                      These arguments have to show that the resulting beliefs were powerful
                                                                and autonomous. Powerful in the sense that they were consistent with the be-
                                                                havior and inconsistent with most alternative courses of action; autonomous
                                                                in that they were long-standing rather than being merely the product of the
                                                                immediate international or domestic situation. In other words, we need to try
                                                                to establish causation and rule out the counter-claim that the beliefs are mere
                                                                window dressing or rationalizations by looking for consistency and showing


                                                                     23 Adam Ulam, The Unfinished Revolution: An Essay on the Sources of Influence of Marxism and

                                                                Communism (New York: Random House, 1960).
                                                                     24 Anthony D’Amato, “Psychological Constructs in Foreign Policy Prediction,” Journal of Conflict

                                                                Resolution 11 (September 1967): 294–311.
                                                                     25 Elizabeth Saunders, Leaders at War: How Presidents Shape Military Interventions (Ithaca, NY:

                                                                Cornell University Press, 2011). For an argument that uses a different approach but also stresses the
                                                                importance of individual presidents in decisions to intervention, see Michael Groh, US Presidents and
                                                                Latin American Interventions: Pursuing Regime Change in the Cold War (Lawrence: University Press of
                                                                Kansas, 2008).
                                                                                                           Do Leaders Matter?                                           167

                                                                that the beliefs were formed before the behavior we are seeking to explain.
                                                                Careful biographies seek to do this, although there is the obvious danger
                                                                that the author’s treatment of the earlier beliefs will be influenced by his or
                                                                her knowledge of the later behavior. Quantitative studies of a president’s
                                                                operational code or personal needs similarly use material written before he
                                                                became president.26 In the same way, some studies examine the integrative
                                                                complexity of leaders’ speeches early in their careers and find connections to
                                                                later behavior.27 Many observers were puzzled when President Reagan was
                                                                quicker than his advisors to reach out to Mikhail Gorbachev and seriously ex-
                                                                plore far-reaching arms agreements because he seemed at least as hard-line
                                                                as they were. Keith Shimko unravels the puzzle by demonstrating that years
                                                                before Gorbachev came to power, Reagan’s belief system was much more
                                                                open to the possibility of Soviet–American cooperation than were those of




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                his advisors.28
                                                                      One might expect those presidents who have had the most foreign
                                                                policy experience to have the most developed and strongest worldviews that
                                                                would leave the strongest imprint on their polices when they took office. But
                                                                it is also possible that an inexperienced president (e.g., George W. Bush)
                                                                could be strongly moved by a few basic instincts, such as the duty to try
                                                                to spread democracy abroad. Indeed, as Bush may exemplify, preferences
                                                                can be both ad hoc and powerful. This is likely to be more difficult to
                                                                demonstrate, however. With a well-formed ideology, one can show that the


                                                                      26 See, for example, Alexander George, “The ‘Operational Code’: A Neglected Approach to the

                                                                Study of Political Leaders and Decision Making,” International Studies Quarterly 13, no. 2 (June 1969):
                                                                190–222; Ole Holsti, “The ‘Operational Code’ Approach to the Study of Political Leaders: John Foster
                                                                Dulles’s Philosophical and Instrumental Beliefs,” Canadian Journal of Political Science 3, no. 1 (March
                                                                1970): 123–57. Also see Richard Hermann and Michael Fischerkeller, “Beyond the Enemy Image and Spiral
                                                                Model: Cognitive-Strategic Research after the Cold War,” International Organization 49, no. 3 (Summer
                                                                1995): 415–50. Stephen Walker and Mark Schafer, “Belief Systems as Casual Mechanisms: An Overview
                                                                of Operational Code Analysis,” in Beliefs and Leadership in World Politics: Methods and Applications for
                                                                Operational Code Analysis, ed., Mark Shafer and Stephen Walker (New York: Palgrave, 2006); Walker,
                                                                Shafer, and Michael Young, “Systematic Procedures for Operational Code Analysis: Measuring and Model-
                                                                ing Jimmy Carter’s Operational Code,” International Studies Quarterly 42, no. 1 (March 1998): 175–90. On
                                                                needs, see David Winter, “Personality and Political Behavior,” in Oxford and Book of Political Psychology,
                                                                ed., David Sears, Leonie Huddy, and Robert Jervis (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003), 110–34;
                                                                David Winter, “Power, Affiliation, and War: Three Tests of a Motivated Model,” Journal of Personality and
                                                                Social Psychology 65, no. 3 (September 1993): 532–45. Also see Margaret Hermann, “Explaining Foreign
                                                                Policy Behavior Using the Personal Characteristics of Political Leaders,” International Studies Quarterly
                                                                24, no. 1 (March 1980): 7–46; Margaret Hermann, Thomas Preston, Baghat Korany, and Timothy Shaw,
                                                                “Who Leads Matters: The Effects of Powerful Individuals,” International Studies Review 3, no. 2 (Summer
                                                                2001): 83–132.
                                                                      27 Philip Tetlock, “Cognitive Style and Political Ideology,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-

                                                                ogy 45, no. 1 (July 1983): 118–26; Tetlock, “Monitoring the Integrative Complexity of American and Soviet
                                                                Policy Rhetoric: What Can Be Learned?” Journal of Social Issues 44, no. 2 (Summer 1988): 101–31; for an
                                                                extension of this approach see Tetlock, “A Value Pluralism Model of Ideological Reasoning,” Journal of
                                                                Personality and Social Psychology 50, no. 4 (April 1986): 819–27.
                                                                      28 Keith Shimko, Images and Arms Control: Perceptions of the Soviet Union in the Reagan Adminis-

                                                                tration (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1991).
                                                                168                                             R. Jervis

                                                                policy was consistent with the beliefs that had been formed earlier, and that
                                                                it was inconsistent with contrary beliefs. We could also demonstrate that
                                                                people with the same ideology supported the same policies. But with ad
                                                                hoc preferences the danger of spuriousness is likely to be greater because
                                                                it will be harder to rule out a possibility that both the belief and the policy
                                                                were the product of some exogenous event, such as the attacks of 9/11.
                                                                     A good example is provided by Fredrik Logvall’s recent argument that
                                                                president Eisenhower wanted to intervene to save the French position at
                                                                Dien Bien Phu, Vietnam in 1954 and did not do so only because even
                                                                strenuous efforts could not overcome allied and congressional opposition.29
                                                                This view clashes not only with much previous scholarship on the question,
                                                                but also, more importantly for our purposes here, with the prevailing view
                                                                of Eisenhower as cautious in foreign policy and, more than his predecessor




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                and successors, loath to see American soldiers engaged in combat. This does
                                                                not mean that either is wrong, but if we accept both of them we have to see
                                                                Eisenhower’s stance here as an anomaly. This in itself is not a problem—it
                                                                might be helpful to us as scholars if leaders always were consistent, but the
                                                                world does not have to conform to our convenience. It does make it harder
                                                                to establish causation, however, because we cannot demonstrate that his
                                                                preferences were consistent with the outlook he held throughout most of
                                                                his life. But neither does it mean that we can automatically attribute them
                                                                entirely to the external pressures that he felt because this would require
                                                                showing that others would have reached the same conclusion, an argument
                                                                that is rendered suspect by the widespread opposition in Congress (and, to
                                                                a lesser extent, within the executive branch) to intervention.


                                                                               IMPLICATIONS FOR PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY

                                                                The way we answer the level-of-analysis question has important implications
                                                                for whether—or rather in what sense—we regard individuals as responsible
                                                                for their behavior. If a president decides on a certain policy, in one obvious
                                                                sense we can say that he is responsible for it. But does this mean that he
                                                                deserves credit or blame? What if we can show, or at least argue, that other
                                                                leaders would have done the same thing had they been in power? This would
                                                                mean that causation resided on a different level of analysis and that while
                                                                the policy may have mattered, who was president did not.30 Why praise or
                                                                blame the president when anyone else would have done the same thing?

                                                                      29 Logvall, Embers of War, 420–504.
                                                                     30 For the differentiation between actor dispensability and action dispensability see Fred Greenstein,

                                                                Personality and Politics (Chicago: Markham, 1969), chap. 1. Here I will concentrate on the former.
                                                                For a further discussion in terms of necessary and sufficient causes, see Robert Jervis, “Causation and
                                                                Responsibility in a Complex World,” in Back to Basics: State Power in the Current World, ed., Martha
                                                                Finnemore and Judith Goldstein (Oxford University Press, forthcoming).
                                                                                                Do Leaders Matter?                          169

                                                                While it would not be right to say that he was not responsible for his own
                                                                actions, neither would it be correct to say that he made a difference.
                                                                     I want to explore these questions by looking at some of President
                                                                Truman’s key decisions in 1945 and 1946 since they raise important questions
                                                                of morality as well as causation. His decision to use atomic bombs against
                                                                Japan and his rigid position on the conditions under which these weapons
                                                                would be put under international control have been the subject of heated
                                                                debates. To start with the former, the two obvious and somewhat related
                                                                questions are whether his actions were morally justified and whether his
                                                                main motive was to end the Pacific War or to intimidate the Soviet Union.
                                                                Most of the discussion is conducted by historians, and true to the strengths
                                                                and weakness of their approach focuses in great detail on what Truman
                                                                heard and believed. This makes intuitive sense: the decision was Truman’s




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                and to understand it we must look at what information he had and sought,
                                                                who he consulted, how he went about deliberating, and the considerations
                                                                that seemed to weigh on him. But while such an approach can describe how
                                                                the decision was made, it cannot establish causation. For this, we need to
                                                                look at changes over time and, even more, at comparisons to other people
                                                                and other situations. At first glance this seems to strengthen the case that
                                                                Truman mattered because some other American decision makers and many
                                                                scientists opposed dropping the bomb on a Japanese city without warning,
                                                                and it is particularly telling that those who opposed Truman’s decision did
                                                                not perceive a Soviet threat. But the comparisons are not entirely apt because
                                                                the advisors, and especially the scientists, were not responsible for preserving
                                                                American lives. This is not to say that they were callous or did not care, but
                                                                only that this consideration was not as salient to them as it was to Truman,
                                                                and I believe as it would have been to any American president. Furthermore,
                                                                the views of the scientists, and of at least some of the advisors, would have
                                                                disqualified them from higher offices.
                                                                     A related approach is to look at Truman’s decision in the light of an
                                                                important historic generalization. Do countries ever refrain from using very
                                                                powerful and destructive weapons when the costs of doing so are low?
                                                                The only case I can think of is the American decision not to use poison
                                                                gas to take Okinawa, when there was no danger of enemy retaliation. If
                                                                this is correct, then it is clear that the desire to intimidate the Soviets was
                                                                not a necessary condition for dropping the bomb. Of course this does not
                                                                mean that this motive was not present, or even that it alone would not have
                                                                been sufficient. But it does mean that we cannot use Truman’s decision and
                                                                the associated claim that the loss of Japanese life was not worth the gain in
                                                                terms of ending the war quickly as evidence that Truman was anti-Soviet. The
                                                                moral objection also does not disappear but is recast. The fact—assuming
                                                                that it is a fact—that all leaders would have behaved in the same way does
                                                                not make the behavior moral. One can argue that it is immoral to value the
                                                                lives of one’s own soldiers so much more than the other side’s soldiers and
                                                                170                                             R. Jervis

                                                                citizens,31 but it is hard to see Truman (or the United States) as particularly
                                                                immoral. Truman may have committed a grave sin, but we are all sinners. If
                                                                he is damned while we are not, it is only because of his position.32
                                                                      A parallel argument can be made about Roosevelt’s and Truman’s failure
                                                                to share the secret of the bomb with Stalin and Truman’s associated refusal
                                                                to compromise in order to reach an agreement for the control of atomic
                                                                weapons. Even leaving aside the difficult question of whether Stalin ever
                                                                would have agreed (which I very much doubt), we can ask whether any
                                                                other leader or country had ever given up such a perceived military advan-
                                                                tage. A reply in the negative does not mean that Truman’s stance was in the
                                                                best interests of the world or even of the United States. One could argue
                                                                either that other leaders should have reached arms control agreements in
                                                                other eras or that nuclear weapons were of such unprecedented destructive-




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                ness that Truman should have broken the pattern and done so. But the latter
                                                                position, which I think is quite reasonable, implies that it would have taken
                                                                an extraordinary leader to have taken this path. Truman can be condemned
                                                                for not having been such a person, but his behavior cannot be explained
                                                                by preferences or characteristics that are unique to him or even unusual. Al-
                                                                though he may have been parochial or rabidly anti-communist, these factors
                                                                were not necessary for the policy.
                                                                      A final bit of comparative evidence indicates some of the methodological
                                                                difficulties. At first glance, my position is bolstered by the fact that Churchill
                                                                strenuously opposed sharing information with Stalin, agreed that the bombs
                                                                should be dropped on Japan, and that his successor Clement Attlee did not
                                                                take a different position on the control of nuclear weapons. But Churchill’s
                                                                stance, especially on dropping the bomb, may have derived from his desire
                                                                to please the United States rather than being an independent judgment,33
                                                                and with the United States reneging on its agreement to maintain atomic
                                                                cooperation with Great Britain, Attlee was in no position to further annoy
                                                                the United States.
                                                                      The dispute over Truman’s decision to use atomic bombs also points to
                                                                strong linkages between judgments about individual cases and broader (and
                                                                often deeply held) theories. When Gar Alperovitz seized scholarly attention
                                                                by claiming that Truman sought to intimidate the Soviet Union and that
                                                                his policy was a sharp break from Roosevelt’s, objections were not long in

                                                                      31 This leaves aside the argument that dropping the bomb saved countless lives of Chinese citizens

                                                                as well as Japanese who would have died from prolonged conventional bombing or been starved by a
                                                                continuation of the American blockade.
                                                                     32 A Maryland judge explained his light sentence to a man who killed his wife after coming home

                                                                unexpectedly and finding her in bed with another man by saying: “I seriously wonder how many
                                                                men married, five, four years would have the strength to walk away without inflicting some corporal
                                                                punishment.” “Punishment Is 18 Months For Killing Cheating Wife,” New York Times, 19 October 1994.
                                                                But this was almost a generation ago in a less enlightened era.
                                                                     33 Jacques Hymans, “Britain and Hiroshima,” Journal of Strategic Studies 32, no. 5 (October 2009):

                                                                769–97.
                                                                                                        Do Leaders Matter?                                      171

                                                                coming.34 Most obviously, those who held to the traditional view of the Cold
                                                                War rejected his thesis (and his scholarship, which indeed was badly flawed).
                                                                It is not that they had any particular reason to disagree with his focus on
                                                                Truman and his advisors. Indeed, many of them blamed Truman for other
                                                                things—especially for being too slow to recognize Soviet aggressiveness.
                                                                Rather, because they saw the Soviet Union as being driven by the internal
                                                                impulse to wage the Cold War, they not only denied, but had to deny, that
                                                                Truman’s dropping the bomb was responsible for this conflict. Although the
                                                                claim that Truman was strongly and indeed provocatively anti-Soviet does
                                                                not logically imply that Stalin was willing to settle for the status quo, because
                                                                it undermines the argument that it was Stalin who made the first moves and
                                                                that American hostility was the result rather than the cause of Soviet actions,
                                                                it called for rebuttals. It made sense for traditionalists to pay less attention




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                to Gar Alperovitz’s argument that Truman broke sharply with FDR’s stance
                                                                because the truth or falsity of this claim did not affect the central tenets of
                                                                their beliefs about the United States, the USSR, or the Cold War.
                                                                      But it did go to the heart of the views of most Cold War revisionists,
                                                                and this accounts for the vehemence with which they turned on Alperovitz.35
                                                                For them what was objectionable was the attribution of responsibility to an
                                                                individual leader because this contradicted their broadly Marxist argument
                                                                that the causes of American foreign policy in this as in other incidents lay
                                                                in the requirements of the American capitalist economy. If it was the case that
                                                                the health of the capitalist system required that societies founded on different
                                                                principles be contained if not destroyed, then while it was predetermined
                                                                that Truman would quickly move against the USSR, it could not be the case
                                                                that Roosevelt would have behaved differently. While these scholars would
                                                                reject the view that Truman was simply behaving as the normal leader of a
                                                                normal great power in seeking to win a war quickly, they would have to join
                                                                with traditionalists in denying Truman’s individual agency because for them
                                                                he was acting as a normal capitalist president. Truman was not and could
                                                                not be more of a villain than his predecessor.
                                                                      These examples illustrate the propensity to attribute responsibility to a
                                                                particular leader or a particular country when we believe that the policy
                                                                is misguided or immoral. Methodologically, this makes sense, but only as
                                                                long as a key assumption is made explicit and defended: the behavior was
                                                                unusual. This reminds us that comparisons and generalizations are a nec-
                                                                essary part of the argument, even if they are often submerged. Our focus
                                                                on failures is not only a product of our fascination with disasters (who has

                                                                     34 Gar Alperovitz, Atomic Diplomacy: Hiroshima and Potsdam: The Use of the Atomic Bomb and the

                                                                American Confrontation with Soviet Power, 2nd expanded ed. (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1965;
                                                                Boulder, CO: Pluto, 1994). For a better argument that Roosevelt’s death made a great difference, see
                                                                Costigliola, Roosevelt’s Lost Alliances.
                                                                     35 See, for example, Joyce Kolko and Gabriel Kolko, The Limits of Power: The World and United

                                                                States Foreign Policy, 1945–1954 ( New York: Harper & Row, 1972).
                                                                172                                R. Jervis

                                                                not craned to look at a car wreck in passing by?), but also of the implicit
                                                                belief that they do not follow in the normal course of events and so need
                                                                a special explanation. This same claim comes up in the less frequent cases
                                                                when individuals are given credit for a decision. Thus those who would
                                                                praise Obama’s decisions that led up to the raid that killed Osama bin Laden
                                                                draw contrasts with his predecessor and point to the many risks it entailed.
                                                                In a relatively small and interesting set of cases there may be agreement
                                                                that the leader drove the policy (i.e., that others would have behaved differ-
                                                                ently), but one group gives credit while the other gives blame. The obvious
                                                                case is Bush’s decision to overthrow Saddam Hussein, which I will touch
                                                                on below. While the numerous critics see this as a disaster that needs to be
                                                                explained by Bush’s misguided style and preferences, his supporters argue
                                                                that only an unusually courageous and clear-eyed leader would have taken




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                such a dramatic but necessary step. Both camps are bolstered by the extent
                                                                to which the policy drew fire within the United States and around the world.
                                                                Although the valences of the analyses from the two camps are opposite, the
                                                                basic empirical assertion and implied comparisons are the same.




                                                                                     POST-COLD WAR PRESIDENTS

                                                                Because the post-Cold War international environment provides American
                                                                presidents with a wider range of choice than was the case for the earlier
                                                                period, we would expect a larger role for individual differences. In fact,
                                                                although the comparisons are difficult, I think that what is striking are the
                                                                continuities, and the changes that did occur are due at least as much to
                                                                external events as to the presidents’ views. But note that this claim excludes
                                                                comparisons to how people who were not elected president might have
                                                                behaved. One can argue that the nature of American politics restricts po-
                                                                tential office holders to a somewhat narrow range in terms of personalities
                                                                and substantive views. It is probably true that Ron Paul, for example, would
                                                                behave very differently were he to become president, but this is one of the
                                                                reasons why he will not become president. Nevertheless, I believe that if we
                                                                were to apply the test I mentioned at the start of this article of writing the
                                                                history without mentioning the name of the serving president, it would be
                                                                hard to infer when a new person entered the Oval Office.
                                                                     There is a significant change from Reagan to his successor, however.
                                                                Quite contrary to the view common at the time that Reagan was an unre-
                                                                deemable hard-liner from the start, most scholars now believe that he moved
                                                                quite quickly to recognize change in the Soviet system (even if he was
                                                                not quick to reciprocate Gorbachev’s concessions), and that he did so in
                                                                part because his preexisting beliefs were more nuanced than his critics had
                                                                                                          Do Leaders Matter?                                         173

                                                                thought.36 The main difference between Reagan and George H. W. Bush was
                                                                not that they had fundamentally different worldviews and preferences, but
                                                                that Bush (and his national security advisor, Brent Scowcroft) were by their
                                                                natures cautious.37 This difference in intellectual styles was compounded by
                                                                the newly felt weight of the responsibility of the office. The break with the
                                                                previous approach did not last long, however. By the time the Berlin wall
                                                                fell in November 1989 and Chancellor Helmut Kohl moved toward German
                                                                unification, Bush was bolder, and both pushed ahead with dealing with Gor-
                                                                bachev and, like Reagan, refused to make many substantive concessions. A
                                                                student of Reagan’s rhetoric might have seen that it was not he who gave
                                                                the (in)famous “chicken Kiev” speech in August 1991, but the fundamental
                                                                policy of friendly gestures, little concrete assistance, and waiting to pick up
                                                                the pieces of the crumbling Soviet empire was shared by the two presidents.




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                      Bill Clinton, of course, came into office after the Cold War was over,
                                                                and he brought little experience or interest in foreign policy to the job.
                                                                Although the first several years were distinct in his lack of involvement in
                                                                the subject and the concomitant tendency for US policy to drift, after that
                                                                he became fully engaged and I think the burden would rest on those who
                                                                would argue that there was a sharp break between his policy and that
                                                                of Bush, his predecessor.38 Although I doubt if the internal records will
                                                                be complete enough to allow us to find a statement paralleling Dulles’s
                                                                that I quoted earlier, in the same way that was true then the domestic and
                                                                international environment and the policy of the Bush administration provided
                                                                a better basis of predicting how Clinton acted than did his campaign platform.
                                                                For example, Clinton strongly criticized Bush for being too soft on China,
                                                                especially about human rights, just as George W. Bush said that the Clinton
                                                                administration did not stand up to the PRC. But in both cases the president
                                                                soon came to see that he was wiser trying to build good relations with China
                                                                and downplaying human rights.
                                                                      This brings us to George W. Bush. At first glance, he is the poster child
                                                                for the importance of the president’s views and modes of behavior. Some-
                                                                what like Truman, his style was to be—or at least to seem to be—decisive.39

                                                                      36 Shimko, Images and Arms Control; Melvyn Leffler, For the Soul of Mankind: The United States, the

                                                                Soviet Union, and the Cold War (New York: Hill and Wang, 2007), pt. 5.
                                                                      37 Bush was strikingly cautious during Poland’s democratic transition: Gregory Domber, “Skepticism

                                                                and the Stability: Reevaluating U.S. Policy during Poland’s Democratic Transformation in 1989,” Journal
                                                                of Cold War Studies 13, no. 3 (Summer 2011): 52–82.
                                                                      38 For good accounts, see Derek Chollet and James Goldgeier, America Between the Wars: From

                                                                11/9 to 9/11 (New York: PublicAffairs, 2008); Hal Brands, From Berlin to Baghdad: America’s Search
                                                                for Purpose in the Post-Cold War World (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2008). For somewhat
                                                                different views, see Zbigniew Brzezinski, Second Chance: Three Presidents and the Crisis of American
                                                                Super Power (New York: Basic Books, 2007) and Elizabeth Saunders, “Changing Threats or Changing
                                                                Leaders? Threat Perception and US Foreign Policy in the Post-Cold War Era,” (unpublished manuscript,
                                                                2011).
                                                                      39 For a superb argument that the common impression that Truman was decisive is quite incorrect

                                                                and a product of his seeking to overcome his decisiveness by deciding quickly, even if he later changed
                                                                174                                             R. Jervis

                                                                He also was averse to compromise and had great trouble getting his subor-
                                                                dinates to work together or to bring up their differing views on issues that
                                                                he himself had to decide. Some of these characteristics may explain why he
                                                                never held a meeting to thrash out whether to invade Iraq, although it is
                                                                interesting that this failed to occur in Great Britain as well. Because I have
                                                                discussed the role of Bush’s outlook and preferences in his foreign policy
                                                                elsewhere, I will be telegraphic.40 While there is room for debate on many
                                                                points, the applicability of Macmillan’s quip seems clear. Before 9/11 Bush
                                                                was set on lowering the American profile abroad, or at least minimizing ef-
                                                                forts at peacekeeping and nation-building. It is hard to argue that from the
                                                                start he was set on invading Iraq and that 9/11 was a mere pretext; offhand
                                                                remarks are all that can be mustered for this view, and there were no moves
                                                                to update the war plans for Iraq.




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                      But saying that 9/11 made an enormous difference only tells us that the
                                                                external environment matters, something that only the most extreme inter-
                                                                nalist would deny. It does not tell us whether others would have responded
                                                                in the same way. Most of the focus has been on the overthrow of Saddam,
                                                                but it is worth noting that perhaps the most consequential decision was
                                                                to treat the terrorist attack as an act of war, which set in motion a wide
                                                                range of policies not only in foreign affairs, but in domestic and legal policy
                                                                as well. From this followed the decision to overthrow the Taliban regime
                                                                in Afghanistan rather than first deploying diplomatic and coercive tools to
                                                                pressure it to dismantle al Qaeda and turn over Bin Laden. The fact that few
                                                                people urged this course of action indicates but does not quite prove that
                                                                here Bush’s preferences were widely shared. In his place a different president
                                                                might have paused, examined the alternatives, and decided to try something
                                                                else first. Would another president have immediately defined the situation
                                                                as a war? Many observers did object to this, but it is interesting that many
                                                                people in the administration seem to have immediately and spontaneously
                                                                adopted this definition of the situation. Douglas Feith, under-secretary of
                                                                defense, who was not in the United States at the time, reports that he and
                                                                his associates immediately saw that this had to be treated as a war.41 Fur-
                                                                thermore, even before the Bush administration developed the war frame, the
                                                                media adopted it.42

                                                                his mind. See Alonzo Hamby, “An American Democrat: A Reevaluation of the Personality of Harry S.
                                                                Truman,” Political Science Quarterly 106, no. 1 (Spring 1991): 33–56; also see Deborah Larson, Origins
                                                                of Containment: A Psychological Explanation (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985). For an
                                                                argument linking Bush’s personality and decision-making style to the decision for the change of strategy
                                                                and surge of additional troops to Iraq in 2007, see Stephen Benedict Dyson, “George W. Bush, the Surge,
                                                                and Presidential Leadership,” Political Science Quarterly 125, no. 4 (Winter 2010–11): 557–85.
                                                                     40 Robert Jervis, American Foreign Policy in a New Era (New York: Routledge, 2005), chap. 4.
                                                                     41 Douglas Feith, War and Decision: Inside the Pentagon at the Dawn of the War on Terrorism

                                                                (New York: Harper, 2008).
                                                                     42 Brigitte Nacos, Yaeli Bloch-Elkon, and Robert Shapiro, Selling Fear: Counterterrorism, the Media,

                                                                and Public Opinion (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011), 2–5.
                                                                                                            Do Leaders Matter?                                            175

                                                                     Most discussions of the decision to invade Iraq and the general Bush
                                                                Doctrine place much of the responsibility on the president’s personality and
                                                                beliefs.43 This is often supplemented by arguments that Bush embodied
                                                                typical American approaches and values. Defenders of the president and
                                                                his policies see the United States as reacting boldly to challenges and as
                                                                having a “second image” belief that countries that tyrannize over their own
                                                                people will be troublemakers abroad and that democracies behave much
                                                                more benignly.44 I believe there is much to this, but realism urges us to start
                                                                with the external environment and those who focus on Bush or the United
                                                                States generally fail to make the sorts of comparisons that would bolster—or
                                                                undermine—their case. In fact, much of the way Bush and the United States
                                                                behaved fits with standard realist expectations (but not prescriptions) of the
                                                                way Great Powers behave.45 To start with, moving the focus off Bush and




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                keeping it on the United States, it is worth remembering that Clinton had
                                                                pledged to remove Saddam from power and adopted as aggressive a stance
                                                                as the international and the domestic climate would permit. Although in the
                                                                end my belief (or rather intuition) is that neither he nor Al Gore would
                                                                have invaded Iraq after these constraints were loosened and the incentives
                                                                changed following 9/11, their public positions, while critical of what they
                                                                saw as Bush’s unilateralism, were ambivalent.46
                                                                     Indeed, there may be nothing particularly Bush-like, neoconservative,
                                                                or American about the invasion of Iraq.47 There are three facets to this
                                                                argument. First and most general is the core of the realist outlook that power
                                                                is checked most effectively if it is not checked only by counterbalancing
                                                                power. States have a propensity to use the power at their disposal, and
                                                                therefore those who are not subject to external restraints, tend to feel few
                                                                restraints at all. As Edmund Burke put it, in a position endorsed by Hans
                                                                Morgenthau: “I dread our own power and our own ambition; I dread our

                                                                     43 A range of arguments can be found in Jane Cramer and Trevor Thrall, eds., Why Did the United

                                                                States Invade Iraq? (New York: Routledge, 2012).
                                                                     44 For an original discussion of the second image, see Waltz, Man, the State, and War, chaps.

                                                                4–5. Although the literature on why this particular perspective has appeal for Americans is voluminous,
                                                                two older studies have not been surpassed. See Louis Hartz, The Liberal Tradition in America: An
                                                                Interpretation of American Political Thought Since the Revolution (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World,
                                                                1955); and Wolfers, Discord and Collaboration, chap. 15.
                                                                     45 For discussion of the tension in realist and other IR theories in terms of their being both descriptive

                                                                and prescriptive see Robert Jervis “Bridges, Barriers, and Gaps: Research and Policy,” Political Psychology
                                                                29, no. 4 (August 2008): 572–74; Ido Oren, “The Unrealism of Contemporary Realism: The Tension
                                                                between Realist Theory and Realists’ Practice,” Perspectives on Politics 7, no. 2 (June 2009): 283–302; John
                                                                Mearsheimer, “Reckless States and Realism,” in Realism and World Politics, ed. Ken Booth (New York:
                                                                Routledge, 2011), 124–40.
                                                                     46 For the argument that President Gore probably would have invaded Iraq, see Frank Harvey,

                                                                Explaining the Iraq War: Counterfactual Theory, Logic, and Evidence (New York: Cambridge University
                                                                Press, 2011).
                                                                     47 Thus it is not entirely surprising that many of the beliefs mustered in support of US policy toward

                                                                Iraq parallel those held by European expansionists in earlier eras. Jack Snyder, “Imperial Temptations,”
                                                                National Interest 71, (Spring 2003): 29–40.
                                                                176                                               R. Jervis

                                                                being too much dreaded. It is ridiculous to say that we are not men, and
                                                                that, as men, we shall never wish to aggrandize ourselves.”48 With this as a
                                                                driving idea, Kenneth Waltz saw the likelihood of America’s current behavior
                                                                from the start of the post-Cold War era:

                                                                       The powerful state may, and the United States does, think of itself as
                                                                       acting for the sake of peace, justice, and well-being in the world. But
                                                                       these terms will be defined to the liking of the powerful, which may
                                                                       conflict with the preferences and the interests of others. In international
                                                                       politics, overwhelming power repels and leads others to try to balance
                                                                       against it. With benign intent, the United States has behaved, and until its
                                                                       power is brought into a semblance of balance, will continue to behave
                                                                       in ways that annoy and frighten others.49




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                      Second and related, states’ definitions of their interests tend to expand
                                                                as their power does.50 It then becomes worth pursuing a whole host of
                                                                objectives that were out of reach when the state’s security was in doubt and
                                                                all efforts had to be directed to primary objectives. With increases in power
                                                                and security, states seek what Wolfers called “milieu goals.”51 The hope
                                                                of spreading democracy and liberalism throughout the world has always
                                                                been an American goal, but the lack of a peer competitor made it more
                                                                realistic—although perhaps not very realistic—to actively strive for it.
                                                                      A third structural explanation for American behavior is that increased
                                                                relative power brings with it new fears. The reasons are both objective and


                                                                      48 Quoted in Hans Morgenthau, Politics Among Nations, 5th rev. ed. (New York: Knopf, 1978),

                                                                169–70, emphasis in original.
                                                                     49 Kenneth Waltz, “America as a Model for the World? A Foreign Policy Perspective,” PS: Political

                                                                Science and Politics 24, no. 4 (December 1991): 69; also see Waltz’s discussion of the Gulf War in “A
                                                                Necessary War?” in Confrontation in the Gulf , ed. Harry Kriesler (Berkeley: Institute of International
                                                                Studies, 1992), 59–65. As Waltz noted much earlier, even William Fulbright, while decrying the arrogance
                                                                of American power, said that the United States could and should “lead the world in an effort to change
                                                                the nature of its politics,” quoted in Theory of International Politics (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1979),
                                                                201. But as an empirical proposition this claim is supported mostly be searching on the dependent
                                                                variable and we have paid little attention to cases in which states underutilize rather than overutilize their
                                                                power. For good studies that do so, see Ernest May, “The United States’ Underuse of Military Power,”
                                                                in History and Neorealism, eds., May, Richard Rosecrance, and Zara Steiner (New York: Cambridge
                                                                University Press, 2010); Randall Schweller, Unanswered Threats: Political Constraints on the Balance of
                                                                Power (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006); Peter Trubowitz, Politics and Strategy: Partisan
                                                                Ambition and American Statecraft (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2011).
                                                                     50 See, for example, Fareed Zakaria, “Realism and Domestic Politics: A Review Essay,” International

                                                                Security 17, no. 1 (Summer 1992): 177–98; Robert Tucker, The Radical Left and American Foreign Policy
                                                                (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1971), 69–70, 74–77, 106–11; Stephen Van Evera, Causes of
                                                                War: Power and the Roots of Conflict (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1999), 86. This process is also
                                                                fed by the psychological resistance to giving up any position once it is gained: see Jeffrey Taliaferro,
                                                                Balancing Risks: Great Power Intervention in the Periphery (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2004).
                                                                For a discussion of alternative possibilities suggested by American history, see Edward Rhodes, “The
                                                                Imperial Logic of Bush’s Liberal Agenda,” Survival 45, no. 1 (Spring 2003): 131–54.
                                                                     51 Wolfers, Discord and Collaboration, chap. 5.
                                                                                                          Do Leaders Matter?                                         177

                                                                subjective. As Wolfers explained in his classic essay on “National Security
                                                                as Ambiguous Symbol,” the latter can diverge from the former.52 In one
                                                                manifestation of this, as major threats disappear, people elevate ones that
                                                                previously were seen as quite manageable.53 But there is more to it than
                                                                psychology. A dominant state acquires an enormous stake in the world or-
                                                                der and interests spread throughout the globe. Most countries are primarily
                                                                concerned with what happens in their neighborhoods; the world is the hege-
                                                                mon’s neighborhood, and it is not only hubris that leads it to be concerned
                                                                with everything that happens anywhere. The result is a fusion of narrow
                                                                and broad self-interest. At a point when most analysts were worried about
                                                                the decline of American power, not its excesses, Waltz noted that for the
                                                                United States, “like some earlier great powers . . . the interest of the country
                                                                in security came to be identified with the maintenance of a certain world or-




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                der. For countries at the top, this is predictable behavior. . . . Once a state’s
                                                                interests reach a certain extent, they become self-reinforcing.”54
                                                                     This is not to say that the policies embodying these impulses were wise;
                                                                indeed, scholars like Waltz who expected them thought they were foolish
                                                                and would eventually fail. Such a judgment may change as events unfold,
                                                                but the point here is that far from being particular to Bush, the pattern of
                                                                states reacting to the lack of external restraint by overreaching and then
                                                                being pressed to retract is a common one.
                                                                     The argument for the importance of domestic and external restraints
                                                                can be extended by the test of imagining writing the history of the post-
                                                                9/11 period without mentioning the names of the two presidents. I would
                                                                argue that if we did this, we would infer that a new president had been
                                                                elected in 2007 or 2008. He (or, because this is hypothetical, she) drew
                                                                back from Bush’s policies of vigorously seeking to export democracy and
                                                                taking preventive actions (e.g., she declined to attack the nuclear facility in
                                                                Syria), and also reformulated our policy in Iraq and Afghanistan. She finally
                                                                took both of these wars seriously and sought to bring means and ends into
                                                                alignment. In Iraq she both cut deals with the Sunnis who had been attacking
                                                                us and staged a short-term surge to get the situation under control, following
                                                                this with an agreement to bring all of our troops home. As this progressed
                                                                and forces became available, she followed a parallel policy in Afghanistan
                                                                of a surge, attempted negotiations with the enemy, turned the war over to
                                                                the Afghans, and withdrew our forces. Rhetoric aside, I do not see how our
                                                                observer could have detected the election of Obama, but he or she could not
                                                                have missed the earlier change of policy, which would be easily attributed


                                                                    52 Ibid., chap. 10.
                                                                     53 John Mueller, “The Catastrophe Quota: Trouble After the Cold War,” Journal of Conflict Resolution

                                                                38, no. 3 (September 1994): 355–75; also see Frederick Hartmann, The Conservation of Enemies: A Study
                                                                in Enmity (Westport: Greenwood Press, 1982).
                                                                     54 Waltz, Theory of International Politics, 200.
                                                                178                                             R. Jervis

                                                                to a change of leadership. As many commentators have pointed out, critics
                                                                of Obama like Dick Cheney and John Bolton really are criticizing him for
                                                                following the path laid out by Bush in his last three years in office. To put
                                                                this another way, although Bush initially marked out a very different policy,
                                                                after a few years both the recalcitrance of the world and the unwillingness of
                                                                the American people to pay so much blood and treasure for the enterprise
                                                                brought him to heel (or, as a realist would put it, led common sense to
                                                                prevail). Presidents are not mere pawns, but neither are they masters of their
                                                                own or their countries’ fate.


                                                                                 IMPLICATIONS FOR DEMOCRATIC CONTROL
                                                                                          AND ACCOUNTABILITY




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                This discussion brings up more sharply the question of democratic control
                                                                and accountability that I have danced around in the body of this paper.
                                                                Democratic control of foreign policy implies that the public can set at least
                                                                the general contours of foreign policy by who it elects to be president. But
                                                                if the external environment imposes both severe constraints and, on fewer
                                                                occasions, offers great temptations, this is an illusion. People may have voted
                                                                for Eisenhower partly because he and Dulles said that they would roll back
                                                                Soviet control over Eastern Europe. But in the end they were thwarted, if
                                                                not deceived (and I think it is more likely that Eisenhower and Dulles were
                                                                relatively honest but had deceived themselves).55 It may be that elections
                                                                and public opinion cannot control foreign policy because presidents have
                                                                the overriding responsibility to protect the nation, another democratic value.
                                                                The lack of democratic control can coexist with rather than negate democratic
                                                                accountability, however, as leaders and parties may be thrown out of office
                                                                for their perceived foreign policy failings. Perhaps this is unfair if no feasible
                                                                alternative policy or leader would have done much better, but punishment
                                                                and the fear of it may still play a powerful role.56 Putting the two pieces
                                                                together and adding the element that the external environment is a difficult
                                                                one and that policies often fail leads to the expectation that parties will
                                                                alternate in power, with administrations often failing and being punished,
                                                                to be replaced by new ones that have promised something new but find
                                                                themselves unable to deliver, and so are themselves turned out of office.


                                                                      55 In fact, Truman pursued more a of roll-back policy than Eisenhower, although the reasons for

                                                                this lie more in the changing external situation than in the president’s preferences. Gregory Mitrovich,
                                                                Undermining the Kremlin: America’s Strategy to Subvert the Soviet Bloc, 1947–1956 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell
                                                                University Press, 2000).
                                                                      56 See, for example, Dan Reiter and Allan Stam, Democracies at War (Princeton: Princeton University

                                                                Press, 2002), and the subsequent debate in the International Security Studies Forum Roundtable, vol. 2,
                                                                no. 12, 1 July 2011, Roundtables at http://www.issforum.org.
                                                                                               Do Leaders Matter?                           179

                                                                      There may be more to it than this, however. When looked at more
                                                                carefully, the Bush/Obama example can be seen as showing a larger and
                                                                different role for democratic control when we consider the role of domestic
                                                                politics. One reason why Bush moderated his policy was that it was increas-
                                                                ingly unpopular. Gaining popular support for it was becoming more difficult,
                                                                and this affected his domestic as well as his foreign program in addition to
                                                                making it less likely that he would be succeeded by another Republican.
                                                                Democratic control then operated through anticipated reactions. The exter-
                                                                nal environment was indeed recalcitrant, but the proximate cause of the
                                                                change of policy was the realization that public opinion would not sustain
                                                                it, and understanding this, Bush altered course. Second and related, conti-
                                                                nuities can reflect the contours etched out by domestic values, traditions,
                                                                and interests. From the standpoint of democratic control of foreign policy,




Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 17:40 03 September 2017
                                                                more significant than the failure of elections to produce great changes is that
                                                                policy never strays too far and too long from what is desirable, or at least
                                                                acceptable, to the public.
