Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

6
Decision-Making: The Organizational Level

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

Historians have long talked about the role of “court politics” or “cabinet politics” in influencing the policies of
kings and other rulers. Political scientists have for many years studied organizational behavior within the
executive branch of the government (Simon, 1949; March and Simon, 1958), but they focused on the role of
governmental politics in domestic policy, not in foreign policy. The underlying assumption was that foreign
policy was “beyond the water’s edge,” and that on issues as important as foreign policy, where the national
interest was at stake, governmental politics was put aside in favor of national interest calculations. Allison’s
Essence of Decision (1971, revised by Allison and Zelikow 1999) was the first systematic challenge to this
assumption. It initiated a wave of research on bureaucratic/organizational influences on foreign policy
decision-making (Halperin and Kanter, 1973; Halperin, 1974; Steinbrunner, 1974: chaps. 3–4).

The Bureaucratic Politics and Organizational Process
Models
Allison (1971) drew on the organizational theory literature and developed two different but overlapping
models of foreign policy that focused on the executive branch of the government. He called one the
“organizational process” model (or “model II”), and he called the other the “governmental politics” model (or
“model III”), which is also called the “bureaucratic politics” model. Allison contrasted these two models with
“model I,” which he described as “the Rational Model” but which is more accurately described as a rational
unitary model of foreign policy (“model I”).1 Allison described the theoretical logic of each of these models
and then applied all three models to the Cuban missile crisis.2 In principle, however, the models are more
general and apply to any state, or at least any state with a substantial bureaucracy.3 We begin with model III,
the governmental politics model, and then turn to the organizational process model.

The governmental politics model

Allison’s (1971) governmental politics model focuses on politics within the executive branch of the
government, where decisions are ultimately made. This model rejects model I’s assumption that the state
acts as a single unit with a well-defined set of foreign policy goals and a consensus on the best strategies for
attaining those goals. Instead, the model zeros in on the inner circle of decision-makers, and assumes that if
we want to understand the foreign policies made by states we need to understand who those decision makers are, how much power they have, and how they define their interests. It recognizes that the president
(or the prime minister in a parliamentary system) is the single most powerful decision-maker, but it
emphasizes that the president’s power is limited by the power of other actors who occupy the top positions
in the primary governmental organizations involved in the making of foreign policy.4
In the United States, these actors include the secretaries of defense and state, the national security
advisor, the chair and members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the head of the CIA, and usually the secretary of
the treasury and a few others selected by the president. Each of these actors has two general tasks. One is to
advise the president (or prime minister) as to the policies that will best serve the interests of the country as a

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

whole. The other is to serve as manager of his/her organization and to act as advocate for the interests of
the organization. Occasionally a key actor will be “minister without portfolio,” without the responsibilities of
representing a particular organization. For example, during the Cuban missile crisis President John Kennedy
asked former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, who was widely respected for his expertise and judgment, to
serve on the Ex Com during the Cuban missile crisis. Robert Kennedy, the Attorney General and the
president’s brother, also served on the Ex Com at the president’s request, and was perhaps its most
influential member because of his unique access to the president.

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

The bureaucratic politics model posits that the policy preferences and recommendations of each of these
key actors may differ because each actor may have different perceptions of the national interest and
because each represents a different organization within the government, each with its own set of interests.
Different organizations within the government have different tasks, and in order to effectively deal with all of
the problems it is asked to solve each organization (and sub-organization within it) generally wants to
maximize the resources available to it.
The greater an organization’s budget and staff, the greater is its ability to solve problems and fulfill its
missions. In addition, most organizations want to maximize their political influence, prestige, and autonomy,
either as ends in themselves or as means to increase their power and resources in the future. Some of these
key actors may have domestic political interests, or be sensitive to the president’s domestic political
interests. They may also have personal interests, including career interests, their historical legacy, and
business or individual financial interests. Thus the policy recommendations made to the president can
reflect some combination of perception of the national interest, organizational interest, and occasionally
domestic political or personal interests.
While each of these interests may influence an actor’s policy preferences, a key proposition of the
bureaucratic politics model is that organizational interests usually dominate. This is captured by the idea
that “where you stand is where you sit” (Allison and Zelikow, 1999). The best predictor of an actor’s policy
preferences and thus of his/her recommendations to the president is the actor’s organizational role and the
organizational interests that s/he represents. One common prediction, for example, is that the defense
department will push for new weapons systems and for increases in the defense budget because larger
defense budgets benefit the defense department and its ability to accomplish its missions. It is also
frequently argued that the Department of Defense tends to be more hawkish in its policy recommendations
than are other organizations. This is often but not always the case. Of all of President Kennedy’s advisors
during the Cuban missile crisis, one of those most opposed to a military option and most supportive of a
diplomatic solution was Secretary of Defense McNamara.
The hypothesized dominance of organizational interests in most actors’ preference structures reflects
either the deliberate priority individuals give to organizational interests over the national interest, or to the
fact that after serving in an organization for many years the actor comes to believe that what is best for the
organization is best for the country. If someone has spent most of his/her career in the navy, and becomes
socialized in the worldview and culture of the navy (and perhaps of a particular branch of the navy), it is not
surprising that s/he might come to believe that the best interests of the country are served by having a
strong navy. When an organization advocates a budgetary level or policy that serves its narrow
organizational interests but perhaps not the national interest, it is sometimes difficult to tell whether that
action is based on narrow self-interest or on the genuine belief that it is acting in the best interests of the
country. In either case, organizational interests have an impact on policy preferences, either directly or
indirectly through shaping the mindsets of organizational actors. The first path is rationalist, while the
second path involves a non -rationalist mechanism.
Key bureaucratic actors vary in their political power and influence as well as their policy preferences. The
influence of each actor depends on his/ her formal position in the government; control over resources,
information, and policy implementation; expertise or reputation; access to the president (or prime minister);
ability to mobilize external support; and political skill. Many of these factors are interrelated. An actor’s
formal position is by far the primary determinant of the resources at his/her disposal, control over
information, and role in policy implementation. The enormous budget of the Pentagon, along with its control

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

over vital information about the potential costs, benefits, and risks inherent in the potential use of force, give
it disproportionate influence on military issues. Its ties with key committees of the Congress, with the
defense industry, and with veterans’ groups further increase its power in the decision-making process by
giving it power to mobilize political support from outside the inner circle of decision -making. The State
Department, on the other hand, has no political constituency, a smaller budget, and generally less influence
(Allison and Zelikow, 1999; Halperin, 1974).

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

The bureaucratic politics model posits a number of different actors, each with different policy preferences
and positions of unequal power within the government. The model predicts that foreign policy is the
outcome of an internal political process of conflict, bargaining, and consensus building among these
different actors. In this model, foreign policy choices are best conceived not as an attempt by a state to
maximize its interests given external threats and opportunities, as in model I, but instead as a process of
reaching a political resolution to a problem of internal conflict among different actors representing different
organizations and advocating different policies.
One useful example of this kind of bargaining, compromise, and consensus-building is provided by
Halperin (1974). In the 1960s, the United States debated whether or not to construct an anti-ballistic missile
system to destroy incoming strategic missiles.5 Two camps formed. One camp advocated a “heavy” missile
system (defined by a large number of interceptor missiles) to protect the US strategic retaliatory force
(rather than US cities) against a Soviet attack. The other camp advocated no missile defense. The result was a
“light” missile defense to protect US cities against a Chinese attack. None of the components of the preferred
positions of either of the camps entered into the final policy. It is a perfect illustration of a bureaucratic
compromise driven by internal politics rather than by a primary concern for the national security interests of
the country as a whole. Neither side got what it wanted, but each avoided what it regarded as the worst
outcome. The result was a bureaucratic compromise resulting from battles over policy and “turf” among
different organizations.
Note that in the bureaucratic politics model each actor attempts to maximize his/her interests as s/he
defines them, usually based primarily on organizational interests. Thus the bureaucratic politics model (at
least in most interpretations) assumes rational actors (Bendor and Hammond, 1992). Since the actors whose
interests are being maximized are individuals (and the organizations they represent) rather than states, and
since those interests differ, the model is a non-unitary rational actor model.

The organizational process model

Allison and Zelikow (1999) constructed an organizational process model (also described as the
“organizational behavior model” or model II) as a second alternative to model I. The organizational process
model also focuses on key foreign policy agencies, but less on the overtly political dimensions of
organizational behavior (on fights over “turf,” for example) than on standardized rules and procedures within
organizations. Instead of emphasizing the interests of each organization and the attempts of those
organizations to select those policies that maximize their interests, the organizational process model focuses
on the standard operating procedures (or SOPs) that are common to all organizations.
The model posits that the decisions of organizations reflect the implementation of the organization’s
procedures or routines. Organizations do not analyze a particular decision problem in its entirety, consider
the context in all of its details, and then make a calculated decision as to what policy is best. Rather, the
organization views the situation, selects which of its pre-existing routines best fits the situation, and then
implements the routine. Instead of looking forward and calculating which strategy would lead to the optimal
outcome under the circumstances, as a truly rationalist model would predict, model II looks backwards to
those routines that the organization set up to automatically implement certain types of policies that provide
the best fit to the problem at hand. One common consequence of routine-driven behavior is incrementalism,
which contributes to the continuity of policy. The best predictor of how an organization behaves at time t is
how they behaved at time t-1.

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

Military routines are a good example. It is often argued, for example, that one reason for the failure of the
American army to win in Vietnam is that it implemented the strategies and operational methods of
conventional war that had worked so effectively in the European theater during World War II but that were
ill-suited to a counterinsurgency war in the jungles of Vietnam (Krepinevich, 1986). This routine-driven
organizational behavior is reinforced by the role of vested interests within the military and its subunits,
because there are always some sub-organizations that benefit (in terms of budgets, manpower, autonomy,
and prestige) by the continuation of earlier policies, even if those policies now appear to be outdated. It is
the advocates of the successful policies in one war who tend to be promoted, and who then use their
influence to establish the routines for the next war. We give more examples of the impact of military
routines on war later in this chapter.

solution.6

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

Organizational theorists also emphasize that bureaucratic organizations tend to follow a distinctive type
of decision rule. Recall that a rational model of decision-making predicts that actors define their goals,
consider a wide range of options, estimate the consequences of each of those options, and select the option
that generates the highest expected utility and is thus most likely to achieve their goals. Organizations tend
to follow a different decision rule. They engage in satisficing (Simon, 1949). Instead of considering all options,
they consider options sequentially until they find one that is good enough, that meets some pre-determined
target level. They do not engage in an extensive information search on all feasible options. Instead of
attempting to find the best solution under the circumstances, they are content to settle on an adequate
Another key concept in organizational theory is one of factored problems (Cyert and March, 1963). This is
the idea that a given problem is often not dealt with as a whole, but parceled out to different organizations
and sub -organizations with the authority and expertise to deal with its own particular aspect of the
problem. The Department of Defense deals with the military dimensions of an issue, the State Department
with diplomatic dimensions, the Treasury with economic dimensions, and so on. This tendency toward
factored problems is enhanced by each organization’s interest in maximizing its own autonomy. An
important consequence of factored problems is the lack of coordination between agencies and a lack of
policy integration. Often the left hand does not know what the right hand is doing, and the actions of one
organization can run contrary to the actions of another organization, with too little direction and control
from the top.
One can find plenty of examples of factored problems and the absence of policy coordination. In her
influential interpretation of the sources of the US intelligence failure at Pearl Harbor, Wohlstetter (1962)
argues that the US had plenty of information about a likely Japanese attack but that the information was
spread over different organizations (the departments of the Army and the Navy). Those organizations chose
not to share their information because of interservice rivalry, competition for control over intelligence, and
the absence of institutionalized routines for the coordination of intelligence. Similarly, in the months leading
up to the September 11, 2001, attacks against the United States, different intelligence agencies had different
pieces of information, but they did not share the different pieces of the puzzle because of organizational
jealousies (Zegart, 2009). A request by the FBI for a warrant to examine the computer of a suspected figure,
who turned out to be a leading planner in the attack, was rejected by other agencies. Another example is the
fact that the emergency response to the 9/11 attack was impeded by the lack of communications between
the New York police and fire departments, in part because their radios were not compatible.
Although Allison and Zelikow (1999) distinguished between models II and III, other scholars combine the
two (Halperin, 1974) and integrate both the competition and bargaining for resources and influence among
actors and the influence of standardized rules and procedures. Most applications of these models to foreign
policy decision-making on security issues incorporate elements from both models (Rhodes, 1989; Maoz,
1990; Zisk, 1993; Sinno, 2008). We follow that practice in our consideration of applications of
bureaucratic/organizational models to issues of war and peace.

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

The Causal Links to War
The bureaucratic politics and organizational process models are theories of decision-making, not theories of
the causes of war. Scholars have applied these models to security policy–including defense spending,
military procurement, the military–industrial complex, and the conduct of war–but there have been relatively
few systematic applications to the causes of war. While these models are not conducive to generating
sweeping generalizations, they do highlight some causal paths involving bureaucratic politics and
organizational processes that might contribute to war under certain conditions. Anyone who is familiar with
these models of decision-making and who reads a historian’s narrative of the causes of a particular war
would undoubtedly notice some of these factors at work.

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

Our aim here is to identify some general causal paths through which bureaucratic politics and
organizational processes contribute to the outbreak of war (or to the preservation of peace) and to illustrate
each with historical examples. One involves the impact of parochial organizational interests on the
formulation of state preferences and strategies. Another involves the organizationally induced distortion of
information flowing up to top-level decision-makers, including the politicization of intelligence. A third
involves the impact of rigidities in organizational behavior on strategy selection. In the following illustrations
we combine elements from both the organizational process and bureaucratic politics models.

Impact of organizational interests on state strategies
There are a number of paths through which bureaucratic/organizational interests might contribute to the
outbreak of war. One line of argument is that military organizations want war and use their influence to
promote war because they believe that war serves the organizational interests of the military. We saw a form
of this argument in our earlier discussion of Schumpeter’s ([1919]1951) argument about military elites.
Schumpeter argued that in earlier eras, when empires and then states faced many external predators,
military elites had a powerful argument in support of their quest for positions of political power in society.
Once in power, those military elites solidified their positions and continued to use war and the threat of war
to justify their policies and maintain their dominant positions, even after earlier external security threats had
diminished.
Although few scholars would argue that most contemporary states, especially advanced industrial states,
are controlled by military elites, the question of the power and influence of military organizations on foreign
and security policy for different kinds of states under various conditions is an important one. It is central to
the bureaucratic politics approaches to war and peace. One can certainly identify some cases in which a
military organization believed that its interests (or perhaps those of the state itself) would be served by war
and gained a position of political power that allowed it to implement its policy preferences. One is Japan in
the 1930s. Japanese military operations in China, combined with the military’s manipulation of domestic
politics through heavy-handed means, gave the military control over the Japanese state and played a
significant role in the processes leading to the Pacific War with the United States (Ienaga, 1978).
Some make a similar argument about German foreign policy in the period leading up to World War I. They
suggest that a powerful group of military and naval officers, led by the General Staff (and its chief of staff von
Moltke), had gained a position of dominance over civilian authorities in the conduct of foreign policy. Some
suggest that the influence of the military was further reinforced by a “social militarism” that “permeated the
whole of society with its ways of thinking, patterns of behavior, and its values and notions of honor” (Wehler,
1985:156). The argument is that Germany pushed for war in 1914 because of the policy preferences and
power of the German military, which had essentially hijacked the German state (Fay, 1928:38–44; Craig,
1955; Ritter, 1970; Van Evera, 1990).
This historical interpretation is controversial. In his highly influential interpretation of German behavior in
1914, Fischer (1967) argues that civilian political leaders led by Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg were firmly in
control until the very end of the July crisis, and that they differed little from the military in terms of their
policy preferences. The German military may have been more sensitive than were civilians to the rise of

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

Russian power and the risks of a two-front war in Europe (given the Franco–Russian alliance against
Germany), but this is more an argument about different conceptions of the national interest than about the
parochial interests of the military.
While one can find instances of militaries with preferences for war and the power to dominate the
decision-making process and implement their preferences, this is almost certainly incorrect as a general
statement about the causes of war in modern international history. It was Hitler and Nazi ideology that
pushed for war in the 1930s, not the German military, which was far more cautious and which actually
opposed Hitler at some key junctures on the road to war in the 1930s (H. Deutsch, 1974; Weinberg, 1994).
Watt (1975) describes the “reluctant warriors” in all of the European capitals in the late 1930s. After World
War II, it is difficult to find any trace of an eagerness for war among military organizations in the industrial
states of Europe.

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

With respect to the United States, one of the few systematic studies of the attitudes of the American
military regarding war and peace after World War II found that professional military officers have not been
significantly more warlike or hawkish than their civilian counterparts. Once war is underway, however,
military organizations have been more hawkish on decisions regarding the escalation of war, to finish the job
they have started and to preserve the reputation of the military once its forces are engaged (Betts, 1977).7
One implication of this is that the factors shaping the termination of war are not necessarily identical to the
factors shaping the outbreak of war, contrary to Blainey (1988) and to some proponents of the bargaining
model of war. New actors and new vested interests at both the bureaucratic and domestic levels come into
play (Iklé, 1971).
Indeed, in most of America’s recent wars, from the Korean War to the Vietnam War to the two wars
against Iraq, American civilians took the lead in advocating policies that involved the use of force. In some
cases these actions went against the preferences of key military leaders. Military experience and first-hand
experience with the horrors of war often leads military leaders to be more cautious than civilian leaders,
who lack comparable experience. Within the military, it is sometimes the “old Turks” who are more cautious
than the eager younger officer corps. This pattern is often reinforced by the fact that younger leaders have
career incentives to participate in combat, because distinction on the battlefield is a prime path to
promotion.
Consider a few historical cases. In the Vietnam War it was the “best and the brightest” (Halberstam, 1969)
of civilian defense intellectuals who were more enthusiastic than the military about the potential benefits of
a dramatic American intervention in the war. In the Cuban missile crisis, although the Joint Chiefs of Staff
were relatively eager to resort to a military strategy to eliminate the Soviet missiles in Cuba, Secretary of
Defense McNamara (along with Robert Kennedy) played a leading role in shifting the majority opinion away
from a potentially risky air strike toward a more cautious strategy of military blockade. In the 1990–91
Persian Gulf crisis, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Colin Powell, argued for a continuation of
economic sanctions against Iraq, at least for a time, rather than for war in January 1991 (Freedman and
Karsh, 1993). As Secretary of State in George W. Bush’s administration, Powell was quite skeptical of the
wisdom of invading Iraq (Woodward, 2004; DeYoung, 2006:194).
Whether or not the military advocates more hardline strategies than do civilians, and in what kinds of
situations and under what conditions, is an empirical question to be investigated through careful historical
research rather than something to be assumed. It is surprising that scholars have devoted relatively little
time to this important issue, and that applications of bureaucratic politics frameworks so often simply
assume that military organizations have more hawkish policy preferences than do other governmental
actors. Scholars need to make more nuanced assessments of the policy preferences of different
organizations.
In addition to the direct link between military interests and decisions for war, military organizations can
contribute to war through a less direct path. Military organizations do not necessarily want war, but like
most organizations they generally want bigger budgets, increased manpower, and more autonomy.
Moreover, by virtue of their worldviews and their training, military elites are often inclined to believe that the

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

national interest is well served by military strength and hardline foreign policies. Some militaries (Germany
before World War I, for example) rationalize their claims for resources by promulgating myths about
permanent threats, intractable enemies, a glorious military past, and military honor (Van Evera, 1990;
Snyder, 1991). They use their power to advance these policy preferences.
Larger military budgets often lead adversary states to increase their own military spending, which
increases tensions, sometimes triggering arms races and conflict spirals, and sometimes leading to war.
Military organizations also push for more technologically advanced weapons systems, which require their
adversaries to do the same. This can also lead to conflict spirals and possibly war, and often more
destructive wars because of the more advanced weapons.8 Thus military organizations may not advocate
war, but they often advocate policies that contribute to the processes that generate conflict spirals that can
lead to war.

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

Another line of argument is that military organizations tend to prefer offensive doctrines and that
offensive doctrines increase the likelihood of war (Posen, 1984:47–51; Snyder, 1984: chap.1; Van Evera,
1999). One reason why military organizations might prefer offensive doctrines is that the implementation of
offensive doctrines and war plans requires larger numbers of troops and weapons systems, greater logistical
support, and often more sophisticated military technology than do more static defensive strategies. This
means larger budgets and manpower, and hence more influence for the military. A second argument is that
offensive doctrines and war plans also contribute to one’s ability to seize the initiative, structure the battle,
and thus fight the war on one’s own terms. This serves the key organizational goal of uncertainty avoidance,
and it also enhances military autonomy and morale.9

Once in place, and whether driven by the internal interests of organizations or external national security
needs, offensive doctrines and war plans contribute to the outbreak of war by increasing the incentives to
strike first; fueling arms races, tensions, and conflict spirals; and encouraging aggressive policies.10 They also
increase the destructiveness of war (Posen, 1984:18–24; Van Evera, 1999). Historians have long argued that
the offensive nature of military plans prior to World War I helped make that war more likely (Albertini,
[1941]1957; Tuchman, 1962).11 In fact, World War I turned out to be a long struggle defined by trench
warfare and slow movement.
This leads to the puzzle of why military organizations did not anticipate this outcome, of the gap between
the actual dominance of the defense and the widespread perception of the dominance of the offense in
warfare (Levy, 1984:233). One argument advanced by a number of international relations theorists is that
offensive war plans, and the pre-World War I “cult of the offensive” more generally, were the result of the
parochial interests of military organizations and the nature of the military cultures of 1914. These offensive
beliefs and doctrines were shared by the militaries of all the Continental great powers in 1914 and
contributed significantly to the processes leading to war by accelerating the perceived incentives to move
quickly, which minimized the opportunities for diplomatic initiatives that might diffuse the conflict (Posen,
1984; Snyder, 1984; Van Evera, 1999).12

This discussion of the military should not give the impression that military organizations are characterized
by a homogeneity of interests and beliefs across their various subunits. Bureaucratic politics takes place
within organizations as well as between them. There were some significant splits within the German military
before World War I. Moltke and the army had been pushing for a preventive war at least since 1912, but
Admiral Tirpitz argued strongly against that strategy on the grounds that the German navy was not yet ready
(Fischer, 1967).
We can also find American examples of doctrines and strategies driven more by organizational interest
than by a reasoned view of the national interest. Some have argued that one of the reasons the US Air Force
recommended bombing campaigns in the Vietnam War was not because it was convinced that it was an
optimal response to the existing threat to US interests, but rather because the Air Force wanted to
demonstrate that there was a role for it to play in the war. Otherwise, it feared that the Air Force might be
perceived as irrelevant to the new guerrilla wars of the 1960s and consequently lose resources to the other
services (Gallucci, 1975). Many argue that one of the reasons for the failure of the US attempt to rescue

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

American hostages in Iran in 1979 was because interservice rivalry led each of the military services to insist
on being involved in the mission rather than allow another service to get the credit for any success, and
because of the lack of tactical coordination among the military services.13
Internal political conflict between bureaucratic organizations can also create policy paralysis or delays that
prevent a timely response to adversary actions and that under some circumstances could contribute to war.
After US intelligence first discovered Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba in October 1962, a follow-up aerial
surveillance mission was ordered to validate the presence of Soviet missiles. The mission was delayed for
ten days, however, by turf battles between the CIA and the Air Force over which organization would conduct
the mission. The outcome of the CIA–Air Force dispute was a classic bureaucratic compromise: CIA pilots
flew Air Force planes (Allison and Zelikow, 1999). These delays could have been far more consequential, but
fortunately the presence of the missiles was confirmed in time for the US to act. Still, the delays complicated

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

the Kennedy Administration’s efforts to manage the crisis and minimize the risk of escalation to war.14
Bureaucratic in-fighting and maneuvering can contribute to peace as well as to war. In the Cuban missile
crisis, US decision-makers in the Ex Com defined their initial options as doing nothing, a diplomatic solution,
a secret approach to Cuban Premier Fidel Castro, an air strike, an invasion, and a blockade. Initially, the
majority of the Ex Com preferred an air strike option. There are a number of possible explanations as to why
they eventually settled on a blockade. One was certainly Robert Kennedy’s insistence that his brother would
not be “another Tojo,” referring to the Japanese premier who ordered the surprise attack against the United
States at Pearl Harbor in 1941. This reluctance to initiate military action and to shift that burden to the Soviet
Union was an important factor influencing US decision-making.
Another consideration, emphasized by Allison and Zelikow (1999) in their discussion of the bureaucratic
politics model, concerned the maneuvering of Secretary of Defense McNamara. McNamara preferred a
diplomatic solution. He recognized, however, that the president was quite skeptical about that strategy
(perhaps for domestic political reasons) and that it would not be possible for McNamara to mobilize
sufficient political support within the Ex Com around a passive strategic response to the Soviet action. For
that reason, McNamara started advocating the blockade option, not because he thought it was the best for
the country, but because it avoided what he regarded as the worst option (the air strike), and because he
thought it might be politically feasible. McNamara calculated correctly and maneuvered skillfully.15
It is also possible that bureaucratic conflict can send mixed signals to adversaries (and to allies), create
confusion about political leaders’ intentions or resolve, and generate misperceptions that can contribute to
war. In the July 1914 crisis, for example, German Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg, after weeks of pressuring
the Austrians to move against Serbia, reversed course on the night of July 29–30 and demanded that
Austrian civilian authorities refrain from war. At the same time, German Chief of Staff Moltke was pressuring
Conrad, his counterpart in Vienna, to move ahead with military action. This led Conrad to complain: “Who
actually rules in Berlin, Bethmann or Moltke?” (Albertini, [1941]1957:673–4). These mixed signals contributed
to the failure of Bethmann’s last-minute efforts to preserve the peace, since it was not clear to the Austrians
what Germany wanted. Admittedly, though, the chance for peace was slim by that point (Levy, 1990/91;
Strachan, 2001).

Organizations and the distortion of information
Organizational interests and routines can also contribute to war (or to peace) through their impact on the
flow of information within decision -making units. Organizations responsible for providing information about
adversary intentions and/or capabilities to higher level decision-makers may be tempted to distort that
information in a way that serves their own interests. Alternatively, their organizational structures may
contribute to the inadvertent distortion of information or presentation of an incomplete picture of the
information available. This can lead to a number of misper-ceptions that influence the likelihood of war.
Many have argued, for example, that during the Vietnam War the US military, which wanted to see the war
through to a successful conclusion, deliberately underestimated numbers of enemy troops and exaggerated

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

the prospects for victory, in an attempt to persuade political authorities to continue the war through to
victory (Adams, 1994).
To take another example, in the run-up to the Bay of Pigs operation in 1961, in which the United States
supported an invasion of Castro’s Cuba by Cuban refugees, officials in the Central Intelligence Agency
deliberately overestimated the likelihood that the operation would trigger a popular uprising in Cuba. They
acted so in order to obtain the political authorization for an operation to which they had become
psychologically committed and which they believed would serve their organizational interests (Higgins,
1987).

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

These examples refer to the distortion of the information flowing up to top decision-makers by the
actions of those organizations tasked with providing that information. Top political decision-makers
sometimes act in a way that prevents the free flow of information, in order to structure the internal debate
and provide additional leverage in mobilizing other governmental actors and the public for war. Although
intelligence ought to shape policy based on the evidence, without interference from political leaders in the
intelligence process, in fact policy often shapes intelligence. This is often referred to as the politicization of
intelligence (Betts, 2007).
It is generally assumed that authoritarian regimes are more vulnerable than democratic regimes to the
politicization of intelligence, because there are fewer channels for dissenting views in autocracies, because
of the lack of protection for individuals under the rule of law, and because of the potentially severe personal
costs of providing news the leader does not want to hear. A major reason why Saddam Hussein failed to
anticipate the likelihood and consequences of an American invasion was that Iraqi military and intelligence
analysts were afraid of Saddam and they felt they had no choice but to provide only good news (Woods,
Lacey, and Murray, 2006). The same dynamic contributed to Stalin’s failure to anticipate the German invasion
in 1941. It was widely known that Stalin was a paranoid tyrant who had executed or sent to the Gulags
anyone whom he suspected might challenge or undermine him. Analysts who believed that Nazi Germany
might turn its armies toward the east and attack the Soviet Union did not express their concerns to Stalin for
fear of the personal consequences (Bar-Joseph and Levy, 2009).
These tendencies toward the politicization of intelligence in authoritarian political systems should not
blind us to the fact that political pressure on the intelligence process arises in democratic regimes as well.
Intelligence officers might consciously adjust their estimates of adversary intentions or capabilities because
they believe that the failure to provide “intelligence to please” might result in the loss of their jobs, the denial
of a future promotion opportunity, or the loss of influence on future policy decisions.
The same outcome can emerge from more subtle pressures. In his analysis of the escalation of American
involvement in the Vietnam War, for example, Thomson (1968) discusses a number of pathologies within
organizations. He emphasizes the role of the “curator mentality” among mid-level officials in the
departments of State and Defense. Rather than question prevailing assumptions and mindsets, individuals’
career incentives led them to adopt a “don’ t rock the boat” orientation. They did their job within the existing
set of guidelines, got their “ticket stamped,” and ultimately received their promotion. While the practice of
“whistle blowing” is extremely useful for organizations, it is often a bad career move for the whistle blower.
These tendencies are reinforced by what Thomson (1968) calls the “effectiveness trap.” If one challenges
prevailing mindsets and policies, one is likely to lose, and in the process there is a risk of suffering a loss of
influ-ence in future decisions. If one resigns in protest, one loses influence altogether. There is a temptation
to go along with the consensus and to save one’s “political capital” for a future issue where one might have
greater impact. Such politically driven processes work to reinforce prevailing mindsets and policies.
Thomson (1968) shows how these dynamics contributed to the gradual escalation of the American
commitment in the Vietnam War in the 1960s by silencing dissenting voices and by limiting the range of
opinions that reached political decision-makers.
Limits on the flow of information can be the result of more deliberate governmental policies. Many argue
that the second Bush Administration was so committed to invading Iraq in 2003 that it deliberately distorted
evidence about the possibility that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction and ties to the al Qaeda terrorist
organization, in order to enhance the support for its policies in the Congress and among the public (Pillar,

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

2006; Rich, 2006). The administration even set up a new intelligence unit, the Office of Special Plans, in the
Defense Department (Gordon and Trainor, 2006:45). There is substantial evidence that this office was
designed to circumvent the CIA and produce intelligence that demonstrated both the existence of Iraqi WMD
and a link between Iraq and al Qaeda, in order to provide a rationalization for a war against Iraq.16 After his
meeting with the British prime minister in 2002, the head of British intelligence concluded that “the
intelligence and facts were being fixed around the policy” (Danner, 2006:89).17

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

Much of the discussion in this section deals with interesting questions in civil–military relations. Brooks
(2008) provides a useful framework for analyzing the impact of civil–military relations on the assessment of
the threat environment and shaping of military strategies. She identifies two key variables: the intensity of
the divergence between civilian and military elites over security issues and over the institutional context for
policy -making, and the balance of political power between civilian and military elites. These factors influence
the extent of information sharing, strategic coordination of political and military policy, procedures for the
accurate assessment of the relative strengths and weaknesses of the adversary’s military organization and
one’s own, and the coherence of the decision-making process on questions regarding the use of force.
Brooks (2008) uses her framework to explain why Egyptian strategic assessment was so flawed under
President Nasser leading up to the disastrous 1967 war with Israel, and why assessment procedures and
military performance significantly improved in the period leading up to the 1973 war under President Sadat.
Brooks also shows, in an analysis of Britain before and during World War I, that there can be significant
variations in the quality of strategic assessment within democratic regimes.

Impact of organizational routines on policy rigidity
The standard operating procedures and vested bureaucratic interests associated with organizational
behavior often affect security policy and decisions related to war and peace by reinforcing existing policies
and strategies, generating policy momentum, and by denying political leaders the flexibility they need to
manage crises in a way that strikes an optimum balance between preserving vital national interests while
avoiding inadvertent escalation. Military organizations are well-known for the routinized nature of their
military mobilization and war plans, and there have been a number of applications of organizational process
models to the military.
Probably the most common explanation of how military routines contribute to the outbreak of war
focuses on the momentum generated by the mobilization plans themselves. Each action in this process of
incremental escalation leads logically to the next, locking in current policy and contributing to a mechanistic
and practically irreversible process of escalation to war, one in which political leaders have a minimal impact
because of the rigid adherence to pre-existing routines. One of the best examples of this is how it applies to
World War I, which we now examine in some detail.
Many historians and political scientists have argued that the rigid military mobilization plans and railroad
timetables of 1914 were an important contributory cause of World War I. This view is reflected in the title of
A.J.P. Taylor’s (1969) book War by Time-table. Once the mobilization process was initiated, the rigidity of the
plans made it difficult or impossible to delay, slow, or modify a plan, or to switch from one mobilization plan
to another, without creating enormous vulnerabilities. Indeed, military and political leaders believed that
“mobilization means war” (Albertini, [1941]1957; Kennedy, 1979). Once the mobilization began, the process
acquired a momentum of its own; the military requirements of preparing for war took precedence over
political requirements of avoiding one if at all possible. Political leaders were left with few opportunities to
slow or interrupt the process in order to pursue diplomatic alternatives that might preserve the peace,
accentuating the slide to war.
The inexorability of the process is captured quite well by Sergei Dobrorolski, Chief of the Mobilization
Section of the Russian General staff, in his description of the process a few years after the war:
The whole plan of mobilization is worked out ahead to its end in all its details. When the moment has
been chosen, one only has to press the button, and the whole state begins to function automatically with

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

the precision of a clock’s mechanism. … The choice of the moment is influenced by a complex of varied
political causes. But once the moment has been fixed, everything is settled; there is no going back; it
determines mechanically the beginning of war (cited in Fay, 1928: vol. 2/481).
The impact of rigid mobilization and war plans is illustrated by the German Schlieffen Plan, which was
based on the assumptions that any continental war would be a two-front war for Germany; that the
slowness of the Russian mobilization (because of the size of the country and its bureaucratic inefficiency)
meant that Germany could engage in an offensive in the west but a holding action in the east in an attempt
to defeat France quickly; that France could be defeated only by an enveloping movement through Belgium,
and that this required the preemptive seizure of Liège early in the mobilization process itself (no later than
the third day); and that the assumed advantage of the offensive meant that every day’s delay could be quite
costly (Ritter, 1958).18

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

The Schlieffen Plan illustrates the consequences of factored problems. Military organizations tend to focus
on the military aspects of policy and to minimize its political component. There is a resulting danger that
military doctrine will follow a “strictly instrumental military logic” and ignore important political
considerations (Posen, 1984:58), which results in a lack of congruence between foreign policy goals of the
state and the military means available to achieve those ends. This is particularly likely in the absence of
strong civilian intervention, which is in part a function of the bureaucratic influence of the military in the
decision-making process.
By calling for a preemptive move against Liège by the third day of mobilization, the Schlieffen Plan
required the violation of Belgian neutrality and significantly increased the probability that Britain would
enter the war. This military policy ran contrary to the efforts of German diplomats, who were doing
everything possible to try to keep the British out of the war. German foreign policy and German military
policy were working at cross -purposes. As Taylor (1969:19) argues:
Politically the plans for mobilization were all made in the void. They aimed at the best technical results
without allowing for either the political conditions from which war might spring or the political
consequences which might follow from any particular plan. There was little consultation between
military planners and civilian statesmen. The statesmen assumed that the general staffs were doing their
best to insure that they would win a war if one came and there was no speculation how policy could be
seconded by military action. The dogma of the great Clausewitz … had lost its hold.19
The problem of low political–military integration is compounded if political leaders are ignorant of the
details of military plans, because they may not realize the extent to which they lack the military options to
support their foreign policy objectives. This ignorance was an important source of escalation in 1914.
Whereas the military saw mobilization as a means of preparing for a war that they perceived to be inevitable,
political decision -makers generally saw it as an instrument of deterrence or coercive diplomacy. They had
little conception, until it was too late, that they lacked the means to support a coercive or deterrent strategy
based on a fine-tuning of military threats, or that their room to maneuver had been severely restricted. As a
result, they did not realize that actions taken in all sincerity to avoid war while preserving vital interests only
made war more likely. Thus Ritter (1958:90) concludes that “The outbreak of war in 1914 is the most tragic
example of a government’s helpless dependence on the planning of strategists that history has ever seen.”
George (1991) suggests several conditions conducive to effective crisis management. In addition to the
limitations of one’s political objectives, these include presidential control of military options, pauses in
military operations, availability of discriminating military options, coordination of military movements with
political–diplomatic actions and with limited political objectives, and others. The military mobilization and
war plans of 1914, and the Schlieffen Plan in particular, violated every one of these requirements. The
Schlieffen Plan left German leaders with no options between a two-front war against France and Russia and
no war at all. The plan would be implemented regardless of the political circumstances that might draw
Germany into a war (Snyder, 1984; Van Evera, 1999). The strategy gave German leaders no intermediate
military option that would allow them to demonstrate their resolve and fine-tune their threats without
provoking the adversary into a dangerous escalation, which is an essential requirement for crisis

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

management (George, 1991). World War I is only one case, but it nicely illustrates the potential causal impact
of common forms of organizational behavior on decisions for war and peace.

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

Another key component of the bureaucratic politics/organizational process model is its focus on
implementation. Political leaders do not implement their own policies, and there is often “slippage” between
the foreign policy decisions of political leaders and the ways in which their decisions are actually
implemented. As Harry Truman remarked as Dwight Eisenhower was about to assume the presidency, “He’ll
sit here, and say ‘Do this! Do that!’ And nothing will happen. Poor Ike–it won’t be like the Army. He’ll find it very
frustrating” (quoted in Neustadt, 1991:10). Similarly, during the Cuban missile crisis President Kennedy
ordered that the naval blockade be moved closer to Cuba in order to give the Soviets more time to reverse
course before a collision, but the Navy did its best to resist those orders (Allison and Zelikow, 1999). Kennedy
also ordered the suspension of weather-sampling flights over the Soviet Union during the crisis, to minimize
the danger of dangerous misperceptions, but that order was not implemented. This led Kennedy to
complain “There is always some son of a bitch who doesn’ t get the word” (quoted in Holsti, 1989:18).
The bureaucratic politics model sees foreign policy decision-making as a political process, defined by
bargaining among actors with difference policy preferences and unequal power. The organizational behavior
model broadens this conception by incorporating certain routinized forms of behavior within organizations,
behavior that is driven by standard operating procedures, rules, and customs rather than explicit
calculations of political interest. These models tend to minimize the genuinely social aspects of group
decision-making–the interpersonal dynamics among the members of any decision-making group, whether it
be a governmental organization or an informal advisory group. We now turn to the social dynamics of
decision -making in small groups.

The Small-Group Level of Analysis

Social psychologists give a great deal of attention to the dynamics of small-group behavior. The small-group
model that has generated the greatest interest among international relations theorists, and which in fact has
become the paradigmatic theory of small-group behavior, is Irving Janis’ (1982) analysis of “groupthink.”
Groupthink is a theory of small-group dynamics that is anchored in individual psychology.20 It is not a theory
of war, but it has a number of important implications for decision-making, especially crisis decision-making,
on issues of war and peace.
Groupthink is a “concurrence-seeking tendency within cohesive groups” (Janis, 1982:7–9), a strong
tendency to conform to group norms and reach a policy consensus. It is motivated not by political pressure,
but by social pressure in the context of high-stakes decisions and enormous stress. Conformity with group
norms and unanimity about policy maintains the integrity of the group and a sanctuary from the burdens of
office, and in doing so provides psychological security for the individual, reduces anxiety, and heightens selfesteem (Janis and Mann, 1977).
Janis argues that groupthink is most likely to arise in socially cohesive groups that are relatively insulated
from the government and from outside sources of intelligence, and also in situations involving significant
moral dilemmas. Tendencies toward groupthink are further reinforced if the group leader actively promotes
his or her preferred policy, if there is no source of contrary views or even a devil’s advocate to raise
unpopular arguments, if the group has recently suffered a significant failure, and if group members are
particularly insecure.
Janis (1982) identifies a number of “symptoms” of groupthink, patterns associated with the tendency
toward concurrence-seeking: illusions of invulnerability, unanimity, and moral superiority; discounting and
rationalization of information that runs contrary to the collective beliefs of the group; and the reinforcement
of these tendencies by self-appointed mindguards who work to shield the group against adverse information
and to put pressure on dissenters. These tendencies generate a number of more specific patterns of group
decision-making: the consideration of a limited number of policy alternatives; failure to reexamine the

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

possible risks of a policy once it is preferred by a majority, or to reconsider the possible benefits of
alternatives after they have been rejected; failure to consider what might go wrong and develop contingency
plans; selective attention to information and discounting of discrepant information; lack of an attempt to
acquire additional information from experts; tendency to elevate loyalty to the highest priority goal; and
tendencies towards riskier courses of action (Janis, 1982; Janis and Mann, 1977:130–31).

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

These patterns detract from a rational decision-making process. They lead to a number of misperceptions
that contribute to war through the causal paths discussed in the last chapter. As with any theory of decision making, it is assumed that the quality of the process is probabilistically linked to the quality of the outcome,
and that if the process is non-rational there is an increase in the probability of ineffective policies and bad
outcomes. Janis (1982) attempts to demonstrate this in his case studies of a number of American foreign
policy failures, including the Bay of Pigs and the Vietnam War. He also compares these cases of foreign policy
failures with the American decision-making regarding the Marshall Plan and the Cuban missile crisis, where
symptoms of groupthink are much less evident and where outcomes were quite successful for the United
States.
While scholars have applauded Janis’s (1982) efforts to construct a small-group model of decision-making,
and welcomed it as an important contribution to our understanding of collective decision-making, they have
criticized the model on a number of grounds. These criticisms have led to the development of alternative
theories of small-group dynamics in foreign policy (Longley and Pruitt, 1980;’ t Hart, 1990; ’ t Hart, Stern, and
Sundelius, 1997). Most of these share many of the features of the group-think model, and it is not necessary
to provide a complete review of these theories here, but we would like to highlight three issues in particular.
First, although Janis (1982) defines groupthink in terms of concurrence -seeking within cohesive groups, it
is conceivable that similar tendencies might arise in non-cohesive groups, and also that some cohesive
groups might not generate such tendencies. A highly cohesive group with considerable experience working
together might feel comfortable questioning each other and raising arguments that run contrary to the
opinions of the majority. The greatest pressures for conformity might be in relatively newly formed,
inexperienced, and weakly institutionalized groups, where individuals are most in need of the group for
psychological comfort, and where many of the decision-making pathologies associated with groupthink are
most likely to occur.
These considerations led Stern and Sundelius (1994) to identify a “newgroup syndrome.” Stern (1997)
argues that the newgroup syndrome provides a better explanation for flawed decision-making during the
Bay of Pigs crisis than does Janis ’s (1982) groupthink model. The newgroup syndrome, if validated, has
important implications for crisis decision-making on war and peace, since many international crises,
particularly those involving democratic states with frequent regime changes, involve new and relatively
inexperienced decision-making groups.
Second, scholars have qualified Janis ’s (1982) hypothesis that small -group dynamics generally lead such
groups to adopt riskier courses of action than would the same individuals acting on their own, which was
consistent with the longstanding risky shift hypothesis. New evidence suggests instead a group polarization
hypothesis, which predicts that small groups will generate either significantly more risky or more cautious
behaviors relative to what one might expect from the simple aggregation of the policy preferences of the
individual members of the group (Minix, 1982; Vertzberger, 1990).
Third, in emphasizing the social–psychological dynamics leading to concurrence-seeking tendencies within
small groups, Janis (1982) downplayed power-related political dynamics that might lead to several of the
decisional pathologies that Janis identifies with groupthink. He also made little effort in his case studies to
rule out these alternative explanations. For example, the tendency to go along with the group might be the
result of political pressure or career incentives rather than the social pressures and internalized group
norms. The recognition that group dynamics do not operate in a political vacuum has led ’ t Hart (1990) and
others to try to construct a small-group theory of foreign policy decision-making that integrates political as
well as social–psychological factors. This is a quite positive development in the field.
We have now covered theories of interstate war grounded in multiple levels of analysis, including
systemic, dyadic, state–societal, and individual-level theories. Although all approaches to the causes of war

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

do not fit readily into separate well-defined levels–a point to which we return in the conclusion–the levels-ofanalysis framework still generates fewer problems of classification than do alternative frameworks. The
application of this framework to theories of civil wars is somewhat more problematic. Distinctions among
levels of analysis remain applicable, but it is much less common for theorists of civil wars than those of
interstate wars to organize their analyses around these different levels. Civil war analysts are also more likely
to integrate variables from multiple levels than are their counterparts who study interstate wars, though the
gap is slowly closing as more of the latter integrate variables from different levels. In the next chapter we
survey some of the leading theories of civil wars.

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

Notes
1. Allison (1971) created considerable confusion by describing model I as “the rational actor” model. This
label was misleading because it implied that his other models were not based on rational actors. As we will
see, especially with respect to the governmental politics model, actors behave rationally on behalf of their
interests (Bendor and Hammond, 1992). Those interests, however, are primarily organizational interests
rather than the national interest. Whereas model I is a unitary rational actor model, model III is a rational
but non -unitary actor model. Although some also interpret model II as a rational non-unitary model,
others argue that certain aspects of the model detract from rationality, as we shall see later in the chapter.
Steinbrunner (1974: chap. 3) suggested a fourth model, a “cognitive model,” which is a non-rational
psychological model of individual behavior.
2. Allison (1971) selected the Cuban missile crisis for a reason. This was an acute national security crisis,
one that involved the risk of nuclear war. If ever we would expect a rational unitary actor model to apply, it
would be in such a crisis. If Allison could show that organizational processes and bureaucratic politics
played an important role in a crisis of this magnitude, we could be reasonably confident that they might
play an important role in other cases where the national interest was not so directly and immediately
threatened. The influence of Allison ’s book derived in part from this research design and case selection.
The Cuban missile crisis is a “least-likely case” for the bureaucratic and organizational models (George and
Bennett, 2005). The logic of least-likely case analysis involves what Levy (2008b) calls the “Sinatra
inference”: if I can make it there, I can make it anywhere. At the same time, the Cuban missile crisis is a
“most-likely case” for the rational unitary actor model. If the case did not fit the model, it would
significantly reduce our confidence in the general applicability of the model.
3. On foreign policy-making in developing states, see Vertzberger (1984), Calvert (1986), Korany (1986), and
Barnett (1992).
4. One common criticism of the utility of the bureaucratic politics model for analyzing US foreign policy is
that it underestimates the power of the president. After all, the president appoints (with the approval of
the Congress) most of the other key actors, usually people who share his views. Another argument is that
in national security crises, the effects of variables in models II and III are generally marginalized by those of
the national interest calculations of model I (Krasner, 1971; Art, 1973).
5. The issue came up again in the 1980s, as the “star wars” program, and it was raised again by the second
Bush Administration.
6. For an application of satisficing decision-rules, rule-driven behavior, and incre-mentalism to individual
behavior, see Steinbrunner’s (1974: chap. 3) conception of a “cybernetic model.”
7. Sechser (2004) makes a different argument. In a statistical study he finds that states that lack strong
civilian control tend to initiate armed conflicts much more frequently than states with stronger civilian
control over their military organizations. This finding implies that the caution of the American military with
respect to strategy is not generalizable to all other states. On a slightly different question, recent work has
revealed an increasing ideological conservatism among American military officers relative to the views of
civilians (Feaver and Kohn, 2001).

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

8. Recall the discussions of the spiral model and of the “steps-to-war” model in chapters 2 and 3. Scholars
debate whether technologically driven “qualitative arms races” are more war-prone than are “quantitative”
arms races (Huntington, 1958).
9. It is not clear that morale is greatest with offensive war plans, although that might depend on exactly
how one defines morale. One thing that is clear is that soldiers tend to fight more intensely in the defense
of their territory against external aggression, or perhaps in recovering lost territory, than in aggressive
actions to conquer another ’s territory. This is consistent with evidence that people fight harder to avoid
losses than to make gains, as we saw in our discussion of prospect theory and loss aversion in the last
chapter.

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

10. One problem with these analyses is that the distinction between offensive and defensive strategies is
not always clear (Levy, 1984; Lieber, 2005). Scholars often lump both incentives to striking first
(preemption) and a strategy of deep territorial penetration into the same offensive category, but they are
distinct. A doctrine may call for waiting for the adversary to strike first but launching a powerful
counteroffensive deep into the adversary ’s territory if one is attacked, as illustrated by Israeli doctrine in
1973 and German military doctrine in the 1870s and 1880s.
11. For a skeptical view, see Zuber (1999), who argues that Germany did not have an offensive war plan.
For responses to Zuber, see Mombauer (2001) and Strachan (2001).
12. Recent scholarship has challenged the long-held belief that all military leaders shared the belief that
the war would be short. There is some evidence that Moltke believed that the war would probably be a
long one (Förster, 1999).
13. McDermott (1998) suggests a prospect theory explanation based on loss aversion: US leaders
recognized that they had few good options, but believed that the status quo was unacceptable, and were
willing to engage in a highly risky strategy in the hope of overturning the status quo.
14. In fact, the Soviet Union had already smuggled nuclear warheads into Cuba, but US leaders were
unaware of this, and in fact did not learn until years after the missile crisis (Dobbs, 2008). Thus American
leaders were operating with very limited information about the magnitude of the threat to US interests. If
the US had known of the presence of nuclear warheads in Cuba, they might have acted much differently in
their crisis bargaining.
15. Reinforcing this argument is the fact that President Kennedy discounted the hawkish views of some in
the CIA because he felt that he had been misled by the CIA in early 1961 during the Bay of Pigs crisis
(Higgins, 1987).
16. It was not accidental that the analysts at OSP were selected for their job precisely because they shared
the administration’s assumptions.
17. This issue is quite complex. Given the inherent uncertainty about Iraqi WMD, the fact that Iraq did have
WMD a decade before and provided no evidence that it had destroyed its stockpiles, and the fact that
many leading Iraqi generals believed that Iraq had WMD, one can imagine intelligence analysts reaching
that conclusion even in the absence of political pressure. Some leading scholars argue that the primary
problem was not the assumption of Iraqi WMD, but the confidence with which it was held and the failure
to constantly question that assumption through an expanded information search and more critical
perspective (Jervis, 2006; Betts, 2007).
18. Some recent research challenges conventional interpretations of the Schlieffen Plan and its impact
(Zuber, 1999; Mombauer, 2001; Lieber, 2007). Moltke probably expected a long war (F ö rster, 1999), and it
is not clear how far west the enveloping movement through Belgium was designed to go (Zuber, 1999).
Still, one can make the argument that Moltke sought a quick victory against France in the west in order to
position Germany for the long war to come.
19. See also Ritter (1958), Turner (1979), Snyder (1984).
20. The groupthink concept is frequently misused by journalists and some scholars, who take it out of the
small-group context for which it was intended and apply it to a tendency toward conformity of thought

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

among any level. Groupthink should be restricted to small groups and not confounded with other sources
of conformity, including ideological and cultural factors.

