Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

2
System-Level Theories

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

The study of the causes of war in political science has traditionally been dominated by realist theories, which
emphasize states’ competition for power and security in a high-threat international environment. In this
chapter we summarize some of the key concepts in realist theories of international conflict, including
anarchy, the security dilemma, the spiral model, and the deterrence model. We then identify varieties of
realist theories and their hypotheses about the causes of war. These theories include classical realism,
neorealism, defensive realism, offensive realism, and neoclassical realism. After examining balance of power
theory in greater detail, we turn to hegemonic theories of conflict, including power transition theory,
hypotheses on preventive war, and long-cycle theory.

Realist Theories

The realist school of thought goes back to Thucydides’ (1996) account of the Peloponnesian War between
Athens and Sparta in the fifth century BCE. Realist international theories were further shaped by Machiavelli,
Hobbes, Rousseau, and a number of other prominent philosophers and social theorists.1 After the rise of
idealism and an emphasis on international law after World War I, and after the failure of those efforts to
prevent the aggressions of the 1930s, Morgenthau’s book Politics Among Nations, first published in 1948, led
a resurgence of realist thinking after World War II.
Realism is not a single theory but instead a constellation of theories, each of which shares a common set
of assumptions but also includes some distinctive elements.2 All realist theories emphasize that the key
actors in world politics are sovereign states (or other territorially defined groups) that act rationally to
advance their security, power, and wealth in an anarchic international system.3 Realists (and most other
international relations theorists) define anarchy in structural terms as the absence of a legitimate
governmental authority to regulate disputes and enforce agreements between states or other actors.
For most realists, anarchy, in conjunction with uncertainty about the intentions of other states, has
enormous consequences. It induces insecurity and a continuous competition for power, which makes the
international system inherently conflictual. Given omnipresent threats, political leaders tend to focus on
short-term security needs and adopt worst-case thinking. They often utilize coercive threats to advance their
interests, influence the adversary, and maintain their reputations. Anarchy does not automatically lead to
war, but it creates a permissive environment for war by creating a system of insecurity, conflicts of interest,
and international rivalries. Realists tend to have a pessimistic worldview, and they tend to be skeptical of
grand schemes for creating and maintaining a peaceful international order.4
Realists generally accept the core hypothesis that a primary determinant of international outcomes,
including both wars and the peaceful settlement of crises and disputes, is the distribution of power in the
international system or within a particular dyad. As Thucydides (1996:352 [5.89]) famously said in the “Melian
dialogue,” “… the strong take what they can and the weak suffer what they must.” Different conceptions of
power and of the specific dynamics of power relationships, however, lead to different realist theories and to
different predictions about the results of particular distributions of power.
Another thing that nearly all realist theorists agree upon is the view that wars can occur both through
deliberate and inadvertent processes, though different strands of realism differ on which of these processes

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

occurs most often. In the first path to war, two states have a direct conflict of interests and at least one
decides that it is more likely to achieve its interests through military force than through a negotiated
settlement. The image here is one of predatory states. Most historical conquests fit this model of deliberate,
unprovoked aggression. Hitler’s initiation of a European war in 1939 is a classic example (Weinberg, 1994), as
is Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990 (Freedman and Karsh, 1993). In this view, a predatory, “revisionist” state
makes a deliberate decision to initiate war to change the status quo in its favor.

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

Equally important, however, is a second path to war that involves states that are content with the status
quo and that are more interested in maintaining their current positions than in extending their influence.
Such “security-seeking” states can end up in war, often an inadvertent war that neither side wants or expects
at the onset of the crisis. International anarchy induces a competition for power driven by the inherent
uncertainty about the intentions of others (Jervis, 1976: chap. 2) and by the fear that others might engage in
predatory behavior. If one’s adversary is growing in strength or forming alliances, the inherent uncertainty
about the adversary’s intentions often leads one to conclude that the worst outcome is the failure to build
up one’s own power, leaving one’s interests exposed if the adversary turns out to have aggressive intentions.
States may take these actions for purely defensive purposes, but adversary states often perceive these
actions as threatening. Compounding this is the fact that most weapons systems can serve offensive as well
as defensive functions. The result is a tendency toward worst-case analysis in the context of extreme
uncertainty. The threatened state responds with measures to protect itself, and those measures are in turn
perceived as threatening by the other. This can generate an action–reaction cycle and a conflict spiral that
leaves all states worse off and that can sometimes escalate to war. This is the core of the security dilemma:
actions that states take to increase their security often induce a response by adversaries and actually result
in a decrease in their security (Herz, 1959; Jervis, 1978; Glaser, 1997). It is worth noting that although an
inadvertent war is inadvertent in the sense that neither side wants war or expects war in the early stage of a
crisis, such wars can actually begin with a deliberate step at the end of an inadvertent process (George,
1991).5

The security dilemma and conflict spiral are the core of the spiral model of war and peace (Jervis, 1976:
chap. 3). These concepts are important in part because they explain how wars can occur even if states prefer
peace to war and even if they behave rationally, since conflict spirals can be structurally induced by the
system. Conflict spirals can also be exacerbated further by non-rational psychological processes, which we
describe in chapter 5 on individual decision-making and war. Spiral theorists often point to World War I or to
the 1967 Arab–Israeli War as examples of spiral dynamics that escalated to war when one side decided to
take preemptive action.6 Another good example of a conflict spiral is the process leading up to the Seven
Years’ War between Britain and France in North America (1756–63), which Americans know as the “French
and Indian War” and which Smoke (1977: chap. 8) describes as involving “no offensive steps by any player at
any time.”
The spiral model is sometimes contrasted with the deterrence model, which suggests that wars occur when
deterrence fails–when one side either lacks the military capabilities to threaten a sufficiently costly response
to aggression, or when its threat lacks credibility (Jervis, 1976: chap. 3).7 Deterrence theorists generally
assume that predatory behavior is the primary path to war and minimize the importance of inadvertent
processes. They adopt the adage “si vis pacem para bellum” (if you seek peace, prepare for war), argue that
military build-ups and coercive strategies reinforce deterrence and maintain the peace, and contend that the
appeasement of aggressors only encourages future aggression. Deterrence theorists often invoke the British
and French attempt to appease Hitler at Munich as an example of the futility of appeasement.8
Spiral and deterrence theorists each argue that the policy prescriptions of the other make war more likely
rather than less likely. Deterrence theorists argue that the more conciliatory policies advocated by spiral
theorists increase the probability of war by undermining deterrence, and spiral theorists argue that the
hardline policies advocated by spiral theorists only provoke conflict spirals and war. Each theory is flawed,
however, because each makes unconditional predictions that ignore the specific contexts of a dispute or
crisis. In some situations, hardline policies work to induce compliance, whereas in other situations they

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

backfire and provoke counter -responses and escalation. The key question is the conditions under which
coercive threats are effective and the conditions under which they are not (Jervis, 1976: chap. 3).
We noted earlier that realist international theory is more of a school of thought than a single theory, and
that there are a number of varieties of realism. Scholars divide up realist theories in different ways, but one
common distinction is between “classical” realism and “structural” realism. Structural realism is often
equated with the “neorealism” of Waltz, but it also includes “defensive” realism and “offensive” realism. A
fifth variation of realism, which formed in response to structural realism, is “neoclassical” realism.

Classical realism

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

Classical (or traditional) realists believed that there are multiple sources of state behavior and hence of the
causes of war. In addition to the importance of the absence of central authority in the international system,
which was central to the theories of Hobbes and to a certain extent of Rousseau (Doyle, 1997), classical
realists emphasized the role of human nature as a source of aggressive behavior and war. They pointed to
aggressive instincts, selfishness, greed, pride, and passion as key factors leading to human aggression. It is
also important to note that classical realists were interested in explaining not only wars and other
international outcomes, but also the foreign policies and grand strategies of states and the art of statecraft.
This led them to develop more detailed but less “parsimonious” theories of international relations.9

Waltzian neorealism

As we noted in chapter 1, Waltz (1959) was very critical of the classical realist idea of attributing causality to
“human nature,” since a constant human nature cannot explain the obvious variations in war and peace over
time and space. In a later book, Waltz (1979) argued more strongly that classical realists did not adhere to
social science methodology, and that they were not interested in constructing theories and hypotheses that
were mutually consistent and subject to empirical test against the empirical evidence. These considerations
led Waltz (1979) to develop neorealism as an alternative realist theory.10 His aim was to give realism a
stronger social science orientation and to construct a parsimonious realist theory.
Whereas traditional realists emphasized the pursuit of power as an end in itself, Waltz (1979) emphasized
the pursuit of security, with power serving as a means rather than an end. Waltz placed particular emphasis
on international anarchy and the distribution of power in the system. Given the limited variation in anarchy
across time and across international systems, and hence its inability to explain the enormous variation in
war and peace over time and space, the distribution of power in the system, especially among the leading
powers, carries most of the explanatory power in Waltzian neorealism. Waltz argued that the distribution of
power has far more impact on state behaviors and international outcomes than do the internal
characteristics of states or the characteristics of individual political leaders. Differently constituted states
under similar configurations of power will act similarly, and similarly constituted states under different
configurations of power will act differently.
Waltzian neorealism is a form of balance of power theory. Waltz (1979) posited that hegemonies rarely
form in international systems and that balances of power are the norm throughout most of international
history. He also argued that the anarchic and competitive nature of the international system leads most
states to emulate the successful practices of other states in providing for their security. Those who are
unable to provide for their security are vulnerable to conquest by others. Thus the anarchic and competitive
international system socializes states and induces certain kinds of beliefs and behaviors (a “realist culture,”
some might say) that reinforce the nature of the system.11
In his analysis of the distribution of power in the system, Waltz (1979) stressed the central importance of
the “polarity” of the international system, a factor that had engaged earlier realists as well.12 Realists argue
that systems of different polarity create different threats and opportunities for states and generate different
foreign policy behaviors, particularly for the great powers. Realists often disagree, however, as to the specific

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

relationship between the polarity of the system and its stability, which is defined different ways but which
usually refers to a low probability of a major war in the system.
For many years the primary debate was about the relative stability of bipolar and multipolar systems.13
Morgenthau (1967), Gulick (1955), and other classical realists, along with Deutsch and Singer (1964) and
some other non-realists, generally argued that multipolar systems were more stable than bipolar systems.
They argued that multipolarity created a greater number of possible coalitions that might form against any
possible aggressor, thus reinforcing deterrence against aggression. In bipolarity, by contrast, the allies of the
leading powers were too weak to play a significant role in balancing against an aggressor. In addition, with
several strong powers in multipolarity, each was less likely to focus all of its energies on any single rival, and
cross-cutting cleavages over multiple issues tended to diffuse conflicts from escalating along a single axis. In
bipolar systems, on the other hand, there is a tendency toward the polarization of the alliance system

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

around the two leading powers, increasing the risks of escalation.14

Waltz (1979) and most neorealists disagreed, arguing that bipolar systems are more stable than multiple
systems. There is less uncertainty under bipolarity, and thus less of a risk of war through miscalculation.15
Each adversary is clearly focused on the other, monitors its behavior, and responds appropriately. In
bipolarity, one leading power has no choice but to balance against the other. Multipolarity raises “collective
action” problems (Olson, 1971), since each state has incentives to “free ride” and let others pay the costs of
balancing against an aggressor. As a result, balances often fail to form against aggression, which undermines
deterrence.
Theoretically, each side of the debate suggests plausible arguments, which raises the empirical question
of which of these effects dominates. Historical evidence on the relative stability of bipolar and multipolar
systems is mixed. The multipolar system of the nineteenth century witnessed relatively few major wars, but
that of the first half of the twentieth century included two world wars. The bipolarity of ancient Greece
witnessed the Peloponnesian War, and the French–Habsburg bipolarity of the early sixteenth century was
quite conflictual, but the bipolar Cold War period was stable (though many argue that had more to do with
the deterrence effects of nuclear weapons than with bipolarity). Mearsheimer (2001a) examines a number of
historical case studies and finds that “unbalanced multipolarity” is the most war-prone type of system, but
statistical analyses yield no evidence that one type of system is significantly more or less war-prone than the
other (Sabrosky, 1985; Bueno de Mesquita and Lalman, 1992; Bennett and Stam, 2004).
Waltzian neorealism is one of the most influential international relations theories of the last half century.
It reinvigorated the realist research program and gave it a more solid social scientific grounding. The norms
of the field soon required that any new theory be tested against a realist alternative. At the same time,
however, Waltz’s theory became a central target for criticism. One of the most basic criticisms was that the
key explanatory variable, the distribution of power in the system, does not vary enough to explain the
enormous variations in war and peace. Nor can neorealist theory explain fundamental changes in key
structural characteristics of the international system (its polarity, for example) or in the behavior of the
actors in that system.16 Thus critics charged that neorealism could make very general predictions, but not
more specific predictions, about international politics (Keohane, 1986; Buzan, Jones, and Little, 1993; Ruggie,
1998).
Waltz (1979) conceded this point to a certain extent. He acknowledged that his theory is limited to
explaining international outcomes, and that it cannot explain the specific foreign policy behaviors of states
or specific wars. He said that “although neorealist theory does not explain why particular wars are fought, it
does explain war’s dismal recurrence through the millennia” (Waltz, 1988:620). Most scholars argue that this
is too limiting, and that we need a theory that explains both international outcomes and foreign policy
behaviors (Elman, 1996) and the conditions under which wars are most likely. Most recent developments in
realist theory can be seen as attempts to introduce additional causal variables in order to formulate a more
nuanced theory (though admittedly a less parsimonious one) that explains more of the complexity of
international relations. The different ways they do this has defined different variations of realist theory. In
addition, contemporary realists have made a much greater effort than earlier realists to test their theories

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

against the empirical evidence, largely through historical case studies (e.g., Walt, 1987; Mearsheimer, 2001a;
Elman, 2004).17

Defensive realism

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

Defensive realists agree with neorealists that the anarchic structure of the international system creates
potential security threats, but they do not believe that anarchy in itself forces states into conflict and war. If
all states seek only security, and if there are no predatory states seeking expansion, and if all states know
that, then states can avoid war. This raises the question of the importance of perceptions of the intentions of
other states. Whereas Waltz (1979) emphasized the central importance of power and argued that states
balance against the leading power in the system, defensive realists emphasize the importance of actual
threats, of which intentions are an important component. Some strong powers can be benign. Following
Stephen Walt’s (1987) development of “balance of threat” theory, defensive realists argue that states balance
against the greatest threats to their interests rather than against the strongest power in the system.
Defensive realists also depart from Waltzian realism in their conception of power. Whereas Waltz (1979)
focused primarily on the overall distribution of power, defensive realists emphasize a more “fine-grained
structure of power” (Van Evera, 1999). One key component of threat is geography. The impact of military
power declines over distance (the “loss of strength gradient” (Boulding, 1962:262)), and spatially distant
states pose less of a threat than do proximate states. Defensive realists also emphasize the importance of
technology, particularly as it affects the “offensive–defensive balance” (Jervis, 1978; Van Evera, 1999). The
more technology contributes to the ease of conquest and gives an advantage to those who strike first, and
the greater the proximity of strong states, the greater the threat to the security of others, the greater the
competition for power and security, and the higher the probability of conflicts and war. If strong states are
distant and if military technology favors the defense, however, security competition is less intense and the
probability of war declines. Similarly, the probability of war is reduced if states adopt defensive doctrines
and military postures. This relates to state intentions and perceptions of intentions. Through defensive
doctrines states can signal their peaceful intentions to their adversaries (Jervis, 1978; Glaser, 1997; Kydd,
1997).
Of all realists, defensive realists are the most confident about the effectiveness of balance of power
mechanisms in restraining aggression. This combines with other factors to limit the utility of territorial
expansion except under relatively rare conditions. All of this makes defensive realists guardedly optimistic
about the possibilities for cooperation under anarchy, at least under certain conditions (Jervis, 1988).
Defensive realists recognize, however, that states are sometimes aggressive, that great powers
occasionally make bids for hegemony, and that war frequently occurs. To explain this, defensive realists
supplement system -level structural variables with domestic variables. If states behave aggressively, it is not
because of anarchy-induced systemic pressures but instead because of malevolent leaders, hostile regimes,
and decision-making pathologies. Defensive realists argue that war will not arise in a world of purely
security-seeking states in the absence of domestically induced revisionist goals or extreme misperceptions
of external threats (Snyder, 1991; Glaser, 1997; Kydd, 1997; Van Evera, 1999).

Offensive realism
Offensive realists do not doubt the existence of predatory states and predatory leaders, but they argue that
the sources of predation can be traced to the structure of the international system, the inherent uncertainty
about adversary intentions, and anarchy-induced tendencies towards worst-case analysis, without invoking
domestic variables. The international system is so hostile and unforgiving that uncertainty about the future
intentions of the adversary combined with extreme worst-case analysis lead even status quo-oriented states
to adopt offensive strategies, which often lead to war (Zakaria, 1992; Labs, 1997; Mearsheimer, 2001a;
Elman, 2004). Even if the adversary has currently benign intentions, there is no guarantee that such
intentions will not turn belligerent in the future, either through a change in orientation of those in power or

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

a change in regime that brings a more hostile regime to power (Copeland, 2000). States often act
aggressively because they perceive that expansion is the best way to provide for security in a competitive
and uncertain world. Contrary to defensive realists, offensive realists contend that aggression sometimes
pays and contributes to the accumulation of power that facilitates further aggression.18

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

Mearsheimer (2001a), for example, contends that the best way for a state to provide for its security is to
achieve hegemony. He argues, however, that no state has the resources to create a truly global hegemony,
especially given the difficulties of projecting power over the oceans (the “stopping power of water”).
Consequently, leading states limit their aims to hegemony over their own region. In contrast to defensive
realists, who argue that regional hegemony is unrealistic because of the formation of blocking coalitions,
Mearsheimer and other offensive realists argue that balancing often fails. Balancing is costly, and states
prefer to “pass the buck” and let others pay the costs of balancing against an aggressor. As a result,
balancing coalitions are slow to form, creating opportunities for aggression. Although balancing has
ultimately worked to prevent hegemony in Europe, it often arises too late to deter aggression in the first
place, as illustrated by the delayed formation of a counterbalancing coalition against Nazi Germany in the
1930s.
The clearest example of a successful bid for regional hegemony, at least in the West during the past five
centuries, is the United States in North America. This raises the puzzle of why the United States has been
able to succeed while others have not. One answer is that the United States is unique among continental
powers because it has faced no peer competitors. The absence of balancing is due to the absence of
balancers, and to the fact that potential balancers in other regions, such as France in the early nineteenth
century, were more preoccupied with local issues, like the struggle for hegemony in Europe (Elman, 2004).
Another point of contention is the defensive realist emphasis on the offensive–defensive balance of
military technology as an important variable. Defensive realists argue that some weapons systems and some
military strategies are inherently defensive, and that by carefully developing defensive military postures
states can provide for their own security without threatening others. Offensive realists reject that argument.
They insist that it is nearly impossible to distinguish defensive weapons from offensive weapons, since
weapons systems can serve multiple purposes (Levy, 1989a; Lynn-Jones, 1995; Betts, 1999; Lieber, 2005;
Mearsheimer, 2001a). They argue that it is also difficult to distinguish aggressive intentions from more
defensive intentions, and that the uncertainty inherent in the system induces a tendency toward worst-case
analysis towards both adversary weapons systems and intentions.19 Thus offensive realists argue that the
security dilemma cannot be diminished, and that any weapons build-up is likely to generate counterresponses and conflict spirals.
To summarize, offensive realists offer a strictly structural theory of war and peace and emphasize the role
of the pursuit of power in the context of anarchy and uncertainty. Defensive realists emphasize the pursuit
of security in a context in which anarchy is present but not always compelling and where technology,
geography, and state strategies can mitigate the effects of anarchy. Defensive realists also depart from a
strict structuralist perspective and incorporate domestic variables in an attempt to explain why wars occur.
What defensive realists fail to do, however, is to offer a complete theory of exactly how domestic factors
influence decisions for war and peace, in what kinds of states and under what conditions. During the past 10
years or so, another variation of realism has emerged, one that departs from structural realism by
constructing a more complete theory of foreign policy behavior that pays more attention to domestic
structures and processes. This is neoclassical realism.

Neoclassical realism
Neoclassical realists (Rose, 1998; Schweller 2006; Lobell, Ripsman, and Taliaferro, 2009) recognize the
importance of anarchy, argue that material capabilities are the single most important determinant of state
strategies, and give causal primacy to system structure. They emphasize, however, that there is an imperfect
“transmission belt” between systemic opportunities and constraints and the foreign policy decisions of
states. System-level pressures affect foreign policy choices through intervening domestic processes. Most

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

important are political leaders’ perceptions and misperceptions of the distribution of material capabilities;
the autonomy of the state from society; the state’s capacity to extract resources from society and to build
military power, which often involves bargaining with societal actors; and the influence of domestic societal
actors and interest groups on the process (Lobell, Ripsman, and Taliaferro, 2009).
Whereas structural realists and some classical realists implicitly assume that a country’s human and
economic resources translate directly into national power, neoclassical realists emphasize the need of state
leaders to mobilize societal resources and covert them into power that can be used to support security
policies of the state (Christensen, 1996; Zakaria, 1998; Schweller, 2006). The ability of state leaders to extract
and mobilize societal resources varies as a function of state strength and its autonomy from society. Weak
states are more divided, influenced more strongly by societal groups, less expansive in the scope of their
responsibilities, and poorer.

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

Thus Zakaria (1998) argues that the rise of the United States to great power status in the world was
delayed because of the relative weakness of its state structures relative to societal groups, resulting in a lag
between the rapid expansion of American economic resources and its effective power from 1865 to 1889.20
This example suggests a challenge for neoclassical realist theory. Neoclassical realists emphasize that they
give causal primacy to system structure and that material capabilities are the primary determinant of state
strategies. It is not clear how the causal primacy argument can be reconciled with the propositions that weak
state structures limit the ability of political leaders to mobilize societal resources to create effective national
power, that political leaders need to bargain with social groups, and that political leaders’ perceptions of
military power often play an important role in the formation of state grand strategies. It is not clear where to
draw the line between a neoclassical realist model that emphasizes the primacy of system structures and
material capabilities–as they are perceived by domestic actors and operate through domestic processes–and
an “innenpolitik” model that emphasizes the primacy of domestic politics (Kerr, 1965).
Since each of these realist theories emphasizes to varying degrees the centrality of the balance of power
in their theories of conflict and war, we now turn to a more detailed look at balance of power theory. Before
doing so, we should note that while nearly all balance theories are realist theories, not all realist theories are
balance of power theories. Although “balance of power realism” is the most common form of realist thought,
one can also identify a form of “hegemonic realism” (Levy, 2003b). Whereas balance of power realism posits
that hegemony is rare but dangerous and that the avoidance of hegemony is the highest goal of states,
hegemonic theories (realist and otherwise) posit that hegemony or hierarchy, not balance, is commonplace
and in fact less war-prone than other distributions of power. After examining balance of power theories, we
then turn to hegemonic theories.

Balance of Power Theory

The balance of power is one of the oldest concepts in international politics. Historians and political scientists
often speak of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries as the “golden age” of the balance of power, and
they occasionally apply the concept to other historical systems and to the contemporary era as well. The
concept, however, is quite ambiguous (Claude, 1962). The balance of power has been used to refer to the
actual distribution of power in the international system, to a distribution of power favorable to one’s own
state, or to any distribution of power. That usage refers to the balance of power as an international
outcome. Some scholars use the balance of power as a synonym for power politics or realpolitik, and thus
refer to the balance of power as a state strategy. Others treat the balance of power as a theory, but those
who do so disagree on what the key assumptions and propositions of balance of power theory are and on
what the theory claims to explain. The different ways scholars use the term balance of power led Richard
Cobden ([1903]1969) to describe it as “a chimera–an undescribed, indescribable, incomprehensible
nothing.”21

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

Here we treat balance of power as a theory, and use the term distribution of power to refer to the actual
or desired distribution of power in the system. We do not try to summarize all of the many versions of
balance of power theory, but to identify what they share in common and to specify the core propositions
that all balance of power theorists would accept. This facilitates a minimal empirical test of balance of power
theory. All balance of power theories share the basic core assumptions of realist theory: the system is
anarchic, the key actors are territorial states (or other territorially based groups) who aim to maximize their
power and/or security, and they act reasonably rationally to promote those goals.22 Different balance of
power theorists then add empirical content to these basic assumptions by suggesting additional
assumptions and hypotheses. This leads to different versions of balance of power theory, some with
conflicting propositions (about the relative stability of bipolar and multipolar systems, for example).

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

Although some balance of power theorists argue that balance of power systems have the goal of
maintaining the peace (Wolfers, 1962: chap. 8; Claude, 1962:55), that view is problematic. First of all, systems
do not have goals. Only actors (individuals, organizations, states) have goals. Second, balance of power
theories generally posit that most states, particularly the great powers, define other goals as more important
than peace and regard war as an acceptable instrument of policy to achieve those goals if other strategies
fail to achieve them.
The primary aim of all states is their own survival, defined as a combination of territorial integrity and
autonomy from outside rule. States also have a nested hierarchy of additional goals that are instrumental
goals for survival. The most important of these is the avoidance of hegemony, a situation in which one state
amasses so much power that it is able to dominate over the rest and thus put an end to the multistate
system. Polybius (1960) wrote that “we should never contribute to the attainment by one state of a power so
preponderant, that none dare dispute with it. …” Vattel ([1758] wrote that, “The balance of power is an
arrangement of affairs so that no State shall be in a position to have absolute mastery and dominate over
others.” Finally, Winston Churchill (1948: 207) stated that, “For four hundred years the foreign policy of
England has been to oppose the strongest, most aggressive most dominating Power on the Continent. …”
Other state goals are instrumental to the prevention of hegemony. One is maintaining the independence
of other states in the system, or at least the independence of the other great powers, which facilitates the
formation of balancing coalitions against potential aggressors. Another is maintaining an approximately
equal distribution of power in the system, defined in terms of some combination of individual state
capabilities and the aggregation of state capabilities in coalitions. This also facilitates the formation of a
number of possible blocking coalitions if one state grows too strong.
Peace is also an important goal of states. It usually advances security, prosperity, social welfare, justice,
and a range of other goals. In balance of power theory, however, the goal of peace is conditional on the
avoidance of hegemony and perhaps the achievement of other instrumental goals. If those goals are
threatened, states are often willing to go to war if necessary to secure their interests.
Balance of power theorists specify two general strategies that states can adopt in their efforts to prevent
hegemonies from forming. Waltz (1979) distinguishes between “external balancing” and “internal balancing.”
The former involves the formation of counterbalancing alliances in order to block the expansion of an
aggressor or to deter a potential aggressor from initiating aggressive policies.23 Internal balancing is the
internal mobilization of military power and a build-up of the economic and industrial foundations of military
strength.
Balance of power theorists are far from agreement on which strategies states adopt under what
conditions, though many argue that external balancing is often the preferred strategy in multipolar systems,
in part because for many states alliances are cheaper than the mobilization of men, money, and materials
(Barnett and Levy, 1991). Internal balancing is generally preferred in bipolar systems, since there are no
other states to serve as potential allies. Although some have argued that states tend to adopt one strategy
or another, there is little evidence of the “substitutabilty” of arms and alliances (Most and Starr, 1987; Palmer
and Morgan, 2006), and these strategies can be mutually reinforcing. The pre-World War I period was
characterized by both coalition formation (the Triple Entente and the Triple Alliance) and by arms races on

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

land and on sea (Kennedy, 1982; Stevenson, 1996). In the Cold War, the United States balanced against the
Soviet Union both by forming the NATO alliance and also by building up its own military capabilities.
It is useful to recall that balance of power theory is a theory of system -level outcomes. Sometimes
scholars confuse balance of power theory with the power parity hypothesis, which predicts that an equality of
power between two states is more likely than a preponderance of power to lead to peace. The power parity
hypothesis is a dyadic-level hypothesis that assumes that alliances play no role, while balance of power
theory is a systemic-level theory in which alliances are central. A finding at one level does not always hold at
the other level.

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

In fact, most quantitative studies of the relationship between the dyadic distribution of power and
war/peace demonstrate that a preponderance of power is more likely than an equality of power to be
associated with peace (Kugler and Lemke, 1996; Bennett and Stam, 2004). This is the power preponderance
hypothesis. The logic is that under preponderance the strong are satisfied and do not have the incentives for
war, and the weak, though dissatisfied, lack the capability for war. Evidence that parity is conducive to war at
the dyadic level does not logically imply that an equality of power is conducive to war at the system level.
Balance of power theorists also argue about the impact of alliances on war and peace. Some argue that
alliances deter war by increasing the probability of balancing against an aggressor (Gulick, 1955:61), while
others argue that alliances generate counter-alliances that sometimes lead to conflict spirals and war.24 In
terms of overall tendencies, there is some evidence that alliances on average tend to increase the probability
of war (Senese and Vasquez, 2008). Indeed, alliances have historically often been followed by war. That does
not necessarily mean, however, that alliances cause war. An alternative interpretation for the correlation
between alliances and war is that alliances form when states anticipate that war is likely, so that underlying
conditions are the cause both of alliance formation and the outbreak of war, with alliances themselves
having little causal impact (Levy, 1989b).25

Despite their many disagreements, most balance of power theorists make some common predictions.
Two propositions in particular stand out. (1) If any state threatens to gain a position of hegemony over the
system that would enable it to dominate over others, a balancing coalition of other states will form against it.
As a result, (2) hegemonies rarely if ever form in world politics. The first is a proposition about state
strategies, and the second is a proposition about international outcomes (Levy, 2003a).
With regard to the first, balance of power theorists point to the balancing coalitions that formed against a
succession of states that grew so strong that they threatened to dominate Europe: Spain under Philip II in
the sixteenth century, France under Louis XIV in the seventeenth century, France under Napoleon at the
beginning of the nineteenth century, and Germany under the Kaiser and then under Hitler in the twentieth
century. Each led to a “hegemonic war” involving most of the great powers in the system and lasting many
years.
The above-mentioned propositions and examples all refer to threats of hegemony over the system and to
“counter-hegemonic balancing” by great powers in response. Balance of power theorists are divided over the
question of balancing against other kinds of threats. Most classical realists and neorealists argue that states
balance against the strongest power in the system, without explicitly specifying whether or not there is a
threat of hegemony; defensive realists argue that states balance against the greatest threat (but not
necessarily a hegemonic threat); and offensive realists emphasize balancing against power but argue that
balancing often breaks down. Few theorize about the balancing behavior of weaker states vis-à-vis stronger
powers. Given the vulnerability of weaker states, particularly those sharing borders with stronger states, and
given their lesser impact on outcomes, weaker states are likely to join the strongest coalition.
One thing all balance of power theorists agree upon, however, is that great powers generally balance
against hegemonic threats. Offensive realists, who argue that states balance against the strongest power,
and defensive realists, who argue that states balance against the strongest threat, both reach this
conclusion. Only the strongest power in the system can threaten hegemony, and the threat of hegemony is
almost always the strongest threat to other states, certainly to other great powers. In fact, there is
systematic statistical evidence that great powers usually balance against a leading state that is strong

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

enough to threaten hegemony but not against a leading state that has lesser margins of advantage, at least
for the last five centuries of the European system (Levy and Thompson, 2005).
At this point in the discussion of balance of power theory and the absence of hegemony, some readers
will be thinking “what about the United States today?” The relative economic and military power of the
United States is historically unprecedented,26 yet no great power balancing coalition has formed against it.
This is a puzzle for many scholars, who argue that balance of power theory predicts balancing in such
situations (Zakaria 2001; Ikenberry 2002:3; Walt, 2005).
Realists disagree on how to explain the absence of absence of “hard balancing” against the United States,
defined as the formation of formal military alliances or substantial increases in military spending, but their

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

explanations can be grouped into five categories.27 Some argue that balancing will still occur and argue that
it is just a matter of time before it does (Waltz, 2000; Layne, 2006). A second group argues that states, and
particularly the great powers, have not balanced against the United States because they recognize that the
US has benign intentions and does not pose a threat to the vital interests of other states.28 They claim that
the US differs from the dominant powers of the past because it has no interest in territorial conquest, in part
because of its geographical isolation from other leading powers (Pape 2005a; Paul, 2005a; Walt, 2005).
Brooks and Wohlforth (2008:35) offer a third explanation: that balance of power theory predicts balancing
against an aspiring hegemon but not against a state that has already achieved a hegemonic position, and
that consequently the theory does not apply to the United States in the period following end of the Cold
War. They trace the absence of balancing to the enormous material capabilities of the United States, both
military and economic, which make it too dangerous to balance against the US.
Mearsheimer (2001a) advances a fourth explanation. He argues that states that have achieved regional
hegemony (global hegemony being out of reach) attempt to prevent the rise of peer competitors in other
regions by playing the role of an “offshore balancer.”29 Weaker states in these other regions are more
worried about threats to their interests emanating from within their region than from outside the region,
and hence do not generally see the offshore balancer as the primary threat to their interests. These
considerations lead Mearsheimer (2001b:49) to conclude that “Offshore balancers do not provoke balancing
coalitions against themselves.” The United States plays the role of an offshore balancer in other regions, and
hence does not provoke balancing coalitions.30

Levy and Thompson (2005, 2010a) offer an alternative interpretation for the absence of great power
balancing against the US, one that overlaps with Mearsheimer’s (2001a) view but that (we think) goes beyond
it. The failure of a balancing coalition to form against the United States does not contradict balance of power
theory because the theory, as it has been developed in the West over the last three centuries, has generally
been applied to land-based continental systems but not to maritime systems. Dominant land powers with
large armies are far more threatening to other leading states than are dominant sea powers with large
navies, and consequently great power coalitions tend to form against the former but not against the latter.31
Just as other great powers rarely balanced against Britain at the peak of its global power in the nineteenth
century, or against the Dutch when they were the leading global power in the late seventeenth century, great
powers do not balance against the United States in the contemporary system.32 Thus the absence of
balancing is not a puzzle for balance of power theory.33
While some argue that balance of power theory works well in explaining the dynamics of past
international systems but not the contemporary system, others argue that the theory fails in earlier periods
as well. They argue that an alternative theory, based on the idea that hierarchy and hegemony are more
common than balance, more accurately captures the strategic dynamics both of the contemporary world
and the world of the past. To these we now turn.

Hegemonic Theories

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

Whereas balance of power theories posit that states fear hegemony, that they balance against any state
threatening hegemony, and that counter -hegemonic balancing makes hegemony rare and great power war
common, hegemonic theories argue that strong concentrations of power in the hands of a single power in
the international system are historically common and stabilizing. Hegemonic theories share realist
assumptions about the primacy of rational and unitary states and their primary concern with power, but
they de-emphasize the importance of anarchy while emphasizing the leading state’s management of the
system within a hierarchical order.

Power transition theory

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

Organski (1958) was the first modern scholar to advance a hegemonic theory (though he avoided the term
hegemon). Organski believed that balance of power theory was too static, too narrowly focused on military
power, and inattentive to the sources of changes in relative power. He argued that international systems are
frequently dominated by a single powerful state that uses its strength to create a set of political and
economic structures and norms of behavior that enhance both the security of the lead state and the stability
of the system as a whole. Some other states are satisfied with the existing order, ally with the leading state,
and receive economic and security benefits from doing so. Other states are dissatisfied, but they are usually
too weak to challenge the dominant state.
In this dynamic theory, differential rates of growth, based largely on different rates of industrialization,
lead to the rise and fall of states (Organski and Kugler, 1980).34 The most dangerous and war-prone
situation is one in which a state that is rising and dissatisfied with the status quo begins to approach the
strength of the leading state in the system and threatens to surpass it in power. The rising challenger has a
motivation to overturn the existing order, which was set up by the dominant state when it was at the peak of
its power and which serves the interests of the dominant state and its allies. Power transition theorists argue
that the challenger initiates a war in order to accelerate the power transition and bring its benefits from the
system into line with its rising military power (Organski and Kugler, 1980; Kugler and Lemke, 1996, 2000;
Tammen et al., 2000). Thus the three key conditions for war in power transition theory are power shifts,
approximate equality of power, and dissatisfaction with the status quo. War is unlikely to occur before the
challenger approaches the strength of the leading state (operationally defined as 80 percent of the strength
of the leader) and after it has surpassed the former leader (by 20 percent).
Unlike balance of power theorists, who focus primarily on military power, power transition theorists
define power as the product of population, economic productivity, and the political capacity of the state to
mobilize the resources of society to support its international policies.35 A state’s power follows an S-shaped
growth curve. Power grows rapidly during industrialization and then levels off to a more modest but
sustained growth. This growth of power is irreversible, and consequently power transitions are unavoidable.
The only question is whether the transformation of the international order is peaceful or violent.
Many attempts to explain power dynamics in the contemporary world, even by scholars who do not
define themselves as power transition theorists, adopt many key elements of the theory. Many scholars
writing about the causes and consequences of unipolarity, for example, argue that American hegemony
contributes to stability in the contemporary world, although there is disagreement as to how long American
hegemony will last. Posen (2003) and Brooks and Wohlforth (2008) each argue that American hegemony is
fairly stable, while Layne (2006) argues that the current unipolar system is transitory and that differential
rates of growth will eventually lead to the rise of new leading powers, with destabilizing consequences for
the international system.36
Power transition theory is also the basis of many arguments about the rise of China and its consequences
for the international system. In particular, many fear the consequences of the continued rise of Chinese
power and the dangers of a Sino–American conflict as the point of power transition approaches. Based on
contemporary growth rates, that point was estimated to occur in about three decades, though it is not clear
how that prediction will be affected by the global economic crisis that began in 2008. Scholars debate the

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

ability of the Chinese economy to sustain its recent growth rate and whether its political system will be
conducive to the kinds of technological innovation that are necessary for a lead economy (Rapkin and
Thompson, 2003). Thus the likelihood and timing of a future Sino–American transition are more uncertain
than power transition theorists imply.

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

One theme of power transition theory that many find useful, however, is that the key variable determining
the peaceful or violent nature of any transition is the extent to which China will be satisfied or dissatisfied
with the international system during and after the power transition. Many argue that the more China is
engaged in an interdependent world economy, the more satisfied it will be with the current international
system, and the lower the probability of a militarized Sino–American conflict over Taiwan or some other
issue. Less useful, however, is the argument by power transition theorists that nuclear weapons have no
deterrent effect on conflict. Most theorists argue that nuclear deterrence was a central stabilizing feature of
the Cold War (Jervis, 1989) and that nuclear weapons will also significantly reduce (though not eliminate) the
danger of a Sino–American war in the future.
Let us return to the question of the timing of war during a power transition. Power transition theorists
have not reached a consensus on this important question. Organski (1958) initially argued that the rising
power initiates a war before the point of transition, for the purpose of accelerating the transition. Organski
and Kugler’s (1980) empirical analysis suggested that the war was likely to occur after the point of transition,
but Kugler and Lemke (2000) question that finding.37 A more recent formulation of power transition theory
(Tammen, et al., 2000) suggests instead that the challenger initiates a war after the point of transition.
The hypothesized timing of the war has important theoretical implications and requires further research.
Organski’s argument that the rising state initiates a war before a power transition is problematic because at
that point the rising power is weaker and it is likely to lose any war. It would make more sense for it to wait
and initiate the war when it is stronger and more likely to win, as Tammen et al. (2000) argue. But if that
were the case, why would the declining state wait for challenger to increase in strength and fight on the
challenger’s terms? Why wouldn’ t the declining state initiate a war to defeat its rising challenger while the
opportunity is still available?
Such a war is often referred to as a preventive war, a concept familiar to historians and to balance of
power theorists. A preventive war is motivated by the perception of a rising adversary, a shift in power, and
by the fear that once the adversary is stronger it will attempt to exploit its advantage through coercion or
war (Van Evera, 1999; Copeland, 2000; Levy, 2008a), and is driven by “better-now-than-later” logic. Faced with
a rising adversary, especially a potentially hostile one, a state may be tempted to fight now, when it is
stronger, rather than later, when conditions are less favorable. The danger of waiting, however, is not just
the risk of a future war. States fear a decline in bargaining leverage associated with their relative decline in
power. If the adversary makes greater demands once it is stronger–and most realists argue that state
interests expand with the relative power of the state–the question is the extent of the concessions the
declining state would have to make in the future in order to avoid the unwanted war.
It is important to emphasize that strategies of prevention are different than strategies of preemption.
Preemption involves a military attack in response to the virtual certainty that the adversary is about to strike
and by the motivation of gaining the advantages of striking first. Prevention is motivated not by the
anticipation of an imminent attack, but instead by the anticipation of an adverse power shift over the next
few years and the fear of its consequences. Israel launched a preemptive strike against Egypt to begin the
1967 war and a preventive strike against Iraqi nuclear facilities in 1981.38
Historians and political scientists have identified numerous cases in which power shifts and better-nowthan-later logic have led to war. When Thucydides (1996:16) argued that the “real cause” of the
Peloponnesian War was “the growth of the power of Athens and the alarm which this caused in Sparta,” he
was invoking preventive logic. The historian A.J.P.
Taylor (1954:166) claimed that, “Every war between Great Powers [in the 1848–1918 period] started as a
preventive war, not a war of conquest.” Scholars have given particular attention to the role of the preventive
motivation in the outbreak of World War I. The argument is that German leaders, recognizing the rising

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

power of Russia and the likelihood any war with Russia would invoke the Franco–Russian alliance, and
fearing that by 1917 Germany could not longer be confident of winning such a war, acted preventively to
fight before its relative power continued to slide (Levy, 1990 /91; Van Evera, 1999; Copeland, 2000;
Stevenson, 2004).
Perhaps the clearest example of a preventively motivated attack is the Israeli strike against the Iraqi
nuclear reactor in 1981. Israel was driven by the fear that Iraq was on the way to acquiring a nuclear
capability that would enormously increase its ability to damage or coerce Israel (Nakdimon, 1987).39
Similarly, the fear of many in the second Bush Administration that Iraq was about to cross the nuclear
threshold was one important factor leading to the US-led war in Iraq in 2003. Although the causes of the war
are quite complex, the preventive motivation was the main rationale the administration used to help

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

mobilize American public opinion in support of the war (Rich, 2006; Levy, 2008a).40

Although impending shifts in relative power sometimes lead to war through preventive logic, more often
such power shifts do not lead to war.41 The United States surpassed Britain as a global power at the
beginning of the twentieth century, but the transition was peaceful. Few states have grown in power as
rapidly as Nazi Germany in the 1930s, but Britain and France responded with a strategy of appeasement
rather than preventive war (Ripsman and Levy, 2007, 2008). This raises the critical question of the conditions
under which adverse power shifts (and perceptions of such) do and do not lead declining states to adopt
preventive war strategies. This is a major task for scholars interested in the question of preventive war
strategies.
We now return to power transition theory’s hypothesis that strong concentrations of power in the
international system (or in a dyad) inhibit war. Balance of power theory posits that hegemony rarely occurs
and that concentrations of power are destabilizing, while power transition theory posits that hegemony
frequently occurs and is stabilizing. The two theories therefore appear to be diametrically opposed. One can
argue, however, that these theories are more “incommensurable” (Kuhn, 1962) than contradictory, in the
sense that they provide different answers to slightly different questions than different answers to the same
question. Balance of power theory and power transition theory are each theories of power dynamics within
international systems, but they focus on different systems and different kinds of power (Rasler and
Thompson, 1994; Levy, 2003a; Levy and Thompson, 2005).
Most balance of power theories implicitly conceive of power in terms of land-based military power, and
their examples of hegemonic threats and balancing are generally based on the European experience, where
high concentrations of power often triggered balancing coalitions and major wars. Applications of power
transition theory, on the other hand, tend to focus on the global system and define power in terms of wealth
and other forms of economic dominance (though it is worth noting that Lemke (2001) applies power
transition theory to regional systems). Their standard indicator of power, for example, is gross national
product (Kugler and Lemke, 1996, 2000). They predict that concentrations of power and wealth in the global
system are stabilizing, while power transitions in that system are destabilizing. The same is true for other
hegemonic theories. Most versions of “hegemonic stability theory” (Keohane, 1984), for example, are
theories of the stability of the international political economy and say little about war and peace.
Since they focus on different systems and on different bases of power in the system, balance of power
theory and power transition theory could each be correct within its own domain. It is conceivable, for
example, that the European system has been most stable under an equilibrium of military power and that
hegemonies rarely if ever form in that system, whereas the global system is most stable in the presence of a
single dominant economic and naval power (which occurs frequently). The most destabilizing situation
would be one characterized by the combination of the diffusion of power at the global level (to the point of
an impending global power transition) and an increasing concentration of power in Europe (Rasler and
Thompson, 1994).
Several of history’s “hegemonic wars” fit this pattern. The two world wars of the twentieth century (1914–
18 and 1939–45) occurred as Britain’s global dominance was rapidly waning while Germany’s power on the
European continent was rapidly increasing. The French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars (1792–1815)

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

occurred after an earlier eclipse of Britain’s global power while France was growing on the Continent. These
patterns are predicted by long-cycle theory, to which we now turn.

Long-cycle theory
Long-cycle theory, as developed by Modelski and his colleagues, was not designed for the primary purpose
of explaining warfare. It is a theory about the emergence of global leadership or management of trans-

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

regional interactions such as trade.42 Global war does, however, have a prominent place in the theory
because it has been a mechanism for consolidating new leadership over the last 500 years. Global wars–
which have been fought in 1494–1516, 1588–1608, 1688–1713, 1792–1815, and 1914–1945–are lengthy
periods of crisis and conflict, generally lasting between 20 and 30 years, that draw in most the major powers
of the era on opposing sides. One side defeats the other and ushers in a new period of global system
leadership. These periods of intensive combat serve as selection devices for leadership in the global system,
with the leading state in the victorious alliance ascending to a position that facilitates developing new rules
and policies for global transactions.
To explain the infrequent but increasingly intensive global wars (Rasler and Thompson, 1994, 2000b;
Modelski and Thompson, 1996), the theory relies primarily on two structural dynamics: regional–global
dissychroniza-tion and the “twin peaks” model. An important distinction is first made between global and
regional politics. Global politics are about managing long-distance commerce, especially after the 1490s,
while regional politics center around attempts to create and stave off continental hegemonies. Over the past
500 years, the elite states in the world system have tended to give greater priority to one or the other of
these two types of activity. Sea powers have specialized in intercontinental trade and, later, industry, while
land powers, particularly those based in Europe, have focused on territorial expansion in the home region.
The dissynchronization element is that deconcentration of resources and leadership in the global system
encourages concentration of power in the regional system and vice versa. Thus, European land powers have
tended to be at their strongest when global sea powers have been at their weakest.
Territorial expansion in Europe threatens leading global powers either directly or indirectly, depending
largely on the location of the global powers in question and how much insulation they possess from land
attacks. For instance, Portugal (sixteenth century) and the Netherlands (seventeenth century) were adjacent
to expanding Spain and France, respectively. Britain (eighteenth and early twentieth centuries) and the
United States (late twentieth century) enjoyed some maritime insulation from French, German, and Soviet
attack. Regardless of the insulation, the threat of hegemonic expansion in Europe galvanizes the leading sea
powers into organizing a coalition of land and sea powers to thwart the threat and into rebuilding the
capabilities of global powers to withstand expansionary attack.
The “twin peaks” model refers to the assertions that long-term economic growth is discontinuous. It
comes in spurts, tends to be monopolized initially by a single state from the global power ranks, and is most
evidently manifested in commercial (prior to the late eighteenth century) and industrial “leading sectors”
that, once introduced, tend to radically change the way the world economy works. The economy that
pioneers the innovation of these leading sectors is rewarded by a predominant position in global politics
because it possesses the system’s strongest economy and technology and is able to develop great wealth as
a consequence.
Each of these lead economies experiences at least two growth spurts. The first one destabilizes the
pecking order of the world economy but also generates the resources needed to finance the suppression of
the threat of regional expansion (as in Western Europe between 1494 and 1945). Victory in global war
exhausts the opposition but tends to be beneficial to the relative position of the leading global power.
Resources are highly concentrated in the global sphere of activities immediately post-global war and highly
deconcentrated in the primary region. Conditions are right for a second growth spurt in the post-war era.
But this state of affairs is highly transitional. The leading global power’s relative position tends to decay. New
(and sometimes old) regional challengers and global rivals emerge with the passage of time. The structural

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

combination of global decline and regional ascents tend to re-create the potential for global war–a war
fought to determine who will make post-war rules and policy in global politics.
Balance of power theory, power transition theory, and long-cycle theory are clearly system-level theories
that emphasize the importance of the overall structure of the international system for state behaviors and

Notes

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

international outcomes.43 The same is true for offensive and defensive realism, though the latter introduces
a dyadic component by focusing on the intentions and proximity of the adversary, and in the end it invokes
domestic causal variables to help explain variations in war and peace. Other realist theories are more
difficult to classify. Classical and neoclassical realism each incorporate individual -, state -, and societal-level
factors, though neoclassical realists insist that the system level is still primary. Each is as interested in
explaining state strategies as well as international outcomes like wars. The spiral model and deterrence
model focus primarily on the interactions between pairs of states and consequently are more properly seen
as dyadic -level theories, but we introduced them in this chapter because they are central to structural
realist theories of war and peace. There are other theories of war and peace that focus primarily on the
dyadic-level interactions of states, though sometimes within a systemic context. We turn to those theories in
the next chapter.

1. On the realist tradition in international politics, see Doyle (1997) and Haslam (2002). For alternative
interpretations of the Peloponnesian War, see Lebow (2001) and Kagan (2003).
2. Realism is a label, not a fact. To call a theory “realist” does not necessarily imply that it is a “realistic”
theory in the sense that it accurately describes and explains international behavior. That must be
determined by theoretical and empirical investigation.
3. This is a conventional view of realism, but particular realist theories loosen some of these assumptions.
Some realists downplay the importance of anarchy and emphasize the hierarchical nature of the
international order within a nominally anarchic system, as we will see in our analysis of “hegemonic
theories” later in this chapter. Many contemporary realists who study civil war have relaxed the statecentric assumption by applying the concept of the ethnic security dilemma to intrastate communal
conflicts (Posen, 1993; Snyder and Jervis, 1999).
4. For good summaries and assessments of realist theory see James (1995), Keohane (1986a), Gilpin (1986),
Brooks (1997), Jervis (1998), Van Evera (1999), and Walt (2002). For a summary of early philosophical
theories of the conditions conducive to a peaceful international order, see Hinsley (1967: part I).
5. The inadvertent war concept also applies to some civil wars. This is reflected in the view of the American
Civil War advanced by Abraham Lincoln in his Second Inaugural Address (March 4, 1865): “All dreaded it, all
sought to avert it … And the war came.”
6. Views of World War I are changing, and many historians and political scientists now emphasize
Germany’s deliberate drive for Continental or world power (Fischer, 1967, 1974; Levy, 1990/91; Copeland,
2000). For a summary of changing interpretations of World War I, see Mombauer (2002). For alternative
interpretations of the 1967 Arab–Israeli War, see Stein (1991), Oren (2002), and Segev (2007). On the puzzle
that preemptive strikes are relatively rare, see Reiter (1995).
7. The spiral model and deterrence model might be better classified at the dyadic–interactional level, since
the key variables are the interactions between two states rather than the properties of the international
system as a whole. These concepts are central to realist theories, however, and they are best discussed
here.
8. This assumes that a strong stand by Britain and France would have led to a conciliatory response by
Hitler and to peace. Most historians question this counterfactual assumption (Murray, 1984).
9. The parsimony of a theory is best conceived in relational terms. One theory is more parsimonious than
another if it explains the same empirical phenomena but with fewer theoretical assumptions, or explains
more with the same number of assumptions. The parsimony criterion calls for “explaining more with less.”

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

Scholars disagree on the importance of parsimony compared with other criteria for evaluating theories.
For an alternative conception of parsimony, one based on the idea that the world is simple, see King,
Keohane, and Verba (1994).
10. Neorealism is sometimes called “structural realism,” but other scholars have constructed alternative
versions of structural realism (Buzan, Jones, and Little, 1993).
11. On realist cultures, see Johnston (1995) and Wendt (1999). See also Vasquez (1993). For an argument
about how belief change can lead to systems change, see Schroeder (1994).

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

12. If power is concentrated in the hands of a single state in an international system, the system is
unipolar. If two states of roughly comparable capability stand far above the rest, the system is bipolar. If
power is more widely distributed, the system is multipolar. The nineteenth century European system was
multipolar; the Cold War period (1945–89) was bipolar; and the contemporary system of American
dominance is unipolar.
13. Until the end of the Cold War and the American dominance, Waltz and other realists gave relatively
little attention to unipolarity. They drew largely on the European experience of the past several centuries,
which had not witnessed unipolarity.
14. Here we distinguish between polarity, or the number of major centers of power, and polarization,
which refers to the clustering of alliance patterns around those centers of power (Rapkin and Thompson,
with Christopherson, 1979).
15. The implication here is that uncertainty is destabilizing, while proponents of multipolarity suggest that
uncertainty is stabilizing, since uncertainty about coalition formation to oppose aggression helps to deter
aggression. This suggests that risk propensity and hence responses to uncertainty are key variables
intervening between polarity and war-proneness (Bueno de Mesquita, 2003). We return to risk propensity
in chapter 5.
16. Thus many criticize realist theory for its failure to predict the end of the Cold War, the collapse of the
Soviet Union, and the transformation from bipolarity to unipolarity (English, 2000). A leading historian
(Gaddis, 1992/93) makes the same criticism of international relations theory as a whole. For a realist
explanation of the end of the Cold War, see Wohlforth (1994/95).
17. The introduction of additional causal variables to explain the enormous variation in war, peace, and
other aspects of international politics has led some critics to argue that realism is a “degenerative research
program” in the sense that the additional variables simply patch up theoretical and empirical
inconsistencies in existing theory without adding new explanatory power (Vasquez, 1997). For debates on
this issue, see Vasquez and Elman (2003). On the concept of “degenerative” and “progressive” research
programs see Lakatos (1970). Another line of criticism is that neorealist theory remains a narrowly
materialist theory that neglects important cultural variables (Wendt, 1999).
18. While some have argued that territorial conquest became less and less useful in an era of industrial
economies and mass politics (Knorr, 1966), Liberman (1996) presents evidence to the contrary for German
expansion in the 1930s.
19. Even an immobile fort might facilitate a state’s offensive actions by reducing the costs to the state of a
counter-offensive by the adversary. For perspectives on “offense–defense theory,” see Brown et al. (2004).
In the Cold War the United States started to build an anti-ballistic missile system designed to intercept
incoming Soviet missiles. Many Americans saw this as a purely defensive weapons system. To the Soviet
Union, however, it was an offensive security threat because it created the possibility that an effective
missile defense might eliminate the Soviet retaliatory threat and therefore undermine Soviet deterrence
against a US first strike.
20. As we discuss in a later chapter, state weakness is seen as a major cause of civil wars because it denies
states a monopoly of violence, undercuts a state’s ability to satisfy the needs of its people, and creates an
opportunity for rebel groups.
21. For useful treatments of the balance of power, see Gulick (1955), Claude (1962), Morgenthau (1967),
Bull (1977), Waltz (1979), Sheehan (1996), Paul, Wirtz, and Fortmann (2004), and Little (2007). Our

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

interpretation draws on Levy (2003a).
22. There are important exceptions. Hegemonic realists like Gilpin (1981) give little weight to anarchy.
Morgenthau (1967) and Waltz (1979) each reject the rationality assumption, but for different reasons.
23. External balancing includes other strategies as well, such territorial compensations or partitioning
states for the purposes of redistributing power and satisfying grievances. It can also include military
intervention or preventive war (Gulick, 1955).
24. Alliances also increase the likelihood that if war occurs it will spread to include additional actors
(Vasquez, 1993).

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

25. Whereas balance of power theorists emphasize the “capability aggregation” function of alliances,
Schroeder ([1976]2004) and Pressman (2008) each argue that states use alliances to restrain their allies.
This suggests an additional possible path between alliances and war or peace. Alliance norms (Kegley and
Raymond, 1990) may also be important.
26. For data, see Brooks and Wohlforth (2008: chap. 2). Posen (2003) emphasizes the United States’
“command of the commons”–air, sea, land, and space. Each argues that US dominance will persist for
many years.
27. True, American dominance has led to various forms of resistance to and non-cooperation with the
United States, as illustrated by the lack of support by leading European states for the American invasion of
Iraq in 2003. Such behavior is often referred to as “soft balancing” (Paul, 2005a; Pape, 2005a). Soft
balancing is important, but does not fit into the same category as “hard” balancing behavior. For critiques
of the concept of soft balancing, see Lieber and Alexander (2005) and Brooks and Wohlforth (2008: chap.
3).
28. The emphasis on intentions reflects a defensive realist view.

29. Britain historically played this role with respect to the continental European system.
30. The US intervention in Iraq in 2003 goes beyond an offshore balancing role.

31. The most widely invoked examples of counter-hegemonic balancing, as noted above, are all against
land powers: Spain in the sixteenth century, France in the seventeenth century and late eighteenth
century, and Germany in the twentieth century.
32. This hypothesis about land powers and sea powers explains why other great powers in the late 1940s
balanced against the Soviet Union, the leading continental power in Eurasia, and not against the United
States, the leading global power. It may be true that over time Europe has become less central in global
politics, but on the other hand there is little doubt that the future of Germany was the central issue in the
Cold War (Trachtenberg, 1999).
33. Levy and Thompson’s (2005, 2010a) broader argument is that the European system upon which
balance of power theory is based may not be representative of all international systems, and that
hypotheses based on the European experience are not automatically transferable to other historical
systems. This point is reinforced by the fact that although a sustained hegemony has not formed in Europe
for at least 1,500 years, hegemonies have been more common in non-Western historical systems (Hui,
2004; Kaufman, Little, and Wohlforth, 2007).
34. There are other closely related theories. Gilpin’s (1981) “hegemonic transition theory” focuses on the
rise and fall of the leading states in the system and their consequence for war and peace. Gilpin’s
important theoretical contribution did not lead to a sustained research program because it was followed
by few empirical studies to test the theory. Doran’s (1991) “power cycle theory” developed the argument
that states go through a power cycle of rise and decline and that they are more prone to warfare at some
stages of the power cycle than at others. Kennedy’s (1987) historical treatment of the rise and fall of the
great powers during the last five centuries included concepts of “imperial overstretch,” relative decline,
and the rise and fall of great powers. Long-cycle theory also emphasizes the rise and fall of states, and we
discuss it below. For more liberal conceptions of hegemonic order, see Ikenberry (2000) and Lake (2009).
35. One could imagine a power transition theory that gave primary emphasis to military power, but
theorists associated with the power transition research program have chosen not to do so.

Printed by: adenjonah@gmail.com. Printing is for personal use only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted without publisher's prior permission. Violators will be
prosecuted.

36. For analyses of the dynamics of the contemporary unipolar system under American primacy, see
Ikenberry, Mastanduno, and Wohlforth (2009) and other articles in the January 2009 issue of World Politics.
37. In critiques from outside the power transition research program, Thompson (1983:110–11) found wars
before transitions and Kadera (2001) generated mixed findings. See also DiCicco and Levy (2003:137–44).
38. Note that prevention as defined here differs from strategies designed to avert war or humanitarian
disasters, such as “preventive diplomacy,” “preventive deployment,” and “preventive intervention.”
39. In the 1981 case, the result was not war because Iraq did not respond militarily, in part because it was
already involved in a war with Iran. Any future Israeli strike against Iran to interrupt its apparent
development of a nuclear program would reflect a strategy of preventive war.

ad
en
jo
na
h@
gm
ai
l.c
om

40. The Bush Administration probably referred to its actions as “preemptive” because preemptive attacks
in response to imminent threats are easier to justify in international law than are preventive strikes in
response to future threats, since the latter but not the former provide some time for the target to
implement alternative strategies in response to the threat. On the ethical and legal dimensions of
preemption and prevention, see Doyle (2008).
41. For statistical evidence, see Lemke (2003).

42. Goldstein (1988) also proposes a long-cycle theory based on changes in the global political economy,
but he gives less attention to system management within a hierarchical order.
43. For a summary of additional system-level theories and evidence on war, see Rasler and Thompson
(forthcoming).

